Consumer Protection Act, 

2019 

&  
1. Corrigendum to CP Act 2019 

2. Effective date of Consumer Protection Act, 2019  

3. The Consumer Protection (Consumer Disputes 

Redressal Commissions) Rules, 2020 

4. The Consumer Protection (Central Consumer 

Protection Council) Rules, 2020 

5. The Consumer Protection (Qualification for 

appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of 

appointment, term of office, resignation and 

removal of the President and members of State 

Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020   

6. The Consumer Protection (Salary, allowances and 

conditions of service of President and Members of 

the State Commission and District Commission) 

Model Rules, 2020. 

7. The Consumer Protection (Mediation) Rules, 2020  

 
 

July 17, 2020 



jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—19 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—19

vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY

Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1

izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY

lañ 54] ubZ fnYyh] 'kqØokj] vxLr 9] 2019@Jko.k 18] 1941 ¼'kd½
No. 54]  NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 9, 2019/SHRAVANA 18, 1941 (SAKA)

bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)

New Delhi, the 9th August, 2019/Shravana 18, 1941  (Saka)

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
9th August, 2019, and is hereby published for general information:—

THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019

NO. 35 OF  2019
[9th August, 2019.]

An Act to provide for protection of the interests of consumers and for the said
purpose, to establish authorities for timely and effective administration and
settlement of consumers' disputes and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection Act, 2019. Short title,
extent,

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. commencement
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, and

application.
appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government, by notification,
this Act shall apply to all goods and services.



2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(1) "advertisement" means any audio or visual publicity, representation,
endorsement or pronouncement made by means of light, sound, smoke, gas, print,
electronic media, internet or website and includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper,
invoice or such other documents;

(2) "appropriate laboratory" means a laboratory or an organisation—

(i) recognised by the Central Government; or

(ii) recognised by a State Government, subject to such guidelines as may
be issued by the Central Government in this behalf; or

(iii) established by or under any law for the time being in force, which is
maintained, financed or aided by the Central Government or a State Government
for carrying out analysis or test of any goods with a view to determining whether
such goods suffer from any defect;

(3) "branch office" means—

(i) any office or place of work described as a branch by the establishment; or

(ii) any establishment carrying on either the same or substantially the
same activity carried on by the head office of the establishment;

(4) "Central Authority" means the Central Consumer Protection Authority
established under section 10;

(5) "complainant" means—

(i) a consumer; or

(ii) any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the
time being in force; or

(iii) the Central Government or any State Government; or

(iv) the Central Authority; or

(v) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having
the same interest; or

(vi) in case of death of a consumer, his legal heir or legal representative; or

(vii) in case of a consumer being a minor, his parent or legal guardian;

(6) "complaint" means any allegation in writing, made by a complainant for
obtaining any relief provided by or under this Act, that—

(i) an unfair contract or unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice
has been adopted by any trader or service provider;

(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to be bought by him suffer from
one or more defects;

(iii) the services hired or availed of or agreed to be hired or availed of by
him suffer from any deficiency;

(iv) a trader or a service provider, as the case may be, has charged for the
goods or for the services mentioned in the complaint, a price in excess of the
price—

(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in force; or



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3

(b) displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods; or

(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any law
for the time being in force; or

(d) agreed between the parties;

(v) the goods, which are hazardous to life and safety when used, are being
offered for sale to the public—

(a) in contravention of standards relating to safety of such goods
as required to be complied with, by or under any law for the time being in
force;

(b) where the trader knows that the goods so offered are unsafe to
the public;

(vi) the services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life and
safety of the public when used, are being offered by a person who provides any
service and who knows it to be injurious to life and safety;

(vii) a claim for product liability action lies against the product
manufacturer, product seller or product service provider, as the case may be;

(7) "consumer" means any person who—

(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised
or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment
and includes any user of such goods other than the person who buys such
goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised, or
under any system of deferred payment, when such use is made with the approval
of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for
resale or for any commercial purpose; or

(ii) hires or avails of any service for a consideration which has been paid
or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred
payment and includes any beneficiary of such service other than the person
who hires or avails of the services for consideration paid or promised, or partly
paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such
services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned person, but does
not include a person who avails of such service for any commercial purpose.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—

(a) the expression "commercial purpose" does not include use by a
person of goods bought and used by him exclusively for the purpose of
earning his livelihood, by means of self-employment;

(b) the expressions "buys any goods" and "hires or avails any
services" includes offline or online transactions through electronic means
or by teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level marketing;

(8) "consumer dispute" means a dispute where the person against whom a
complaint has been made, denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint;

(9) "consumer rights" includes,—

(i) the right to be protected against the marketing of goods, products or
services which are hazardous to life and property;

(ii) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity,
standard and price of goods, products or services, as the case may be, so as to
protect the consumer against unfair trade practices;



4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(iii) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to a variety of
goods, products or services at competitive prices;

(iv) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumer's interests will
receive due consideration at appropriate fora;

(v) the right to seek redressal against unfair trade practice or restrictive
trade practices or unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and

(vi) the right to consumer awareness;

(10) "defect" means any fault, imperfection or shortcoming in the quality,
quantity, potency, purity or standard which is required to be maintained by or under
any law for the time being in force or under any contract, express or implied or as is
claimed by the trader in any manner whatsoever in relation to any goods or product
and the expression "defective" shall be construed accordingly;

(11) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in
the quality, nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or
under any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a
person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service and includes—

(i) any act of negligence or omission or commission by such person which
causes loss or injury to the consumer; and

(ii) deliberate withholding of relevant information by such person to the
consumer;

(12) "design", in relation to a product, means the intended or known physical
and material characteristics of such product and includes any intended or known
formulation or content of such product and the usual result of the intended
manufacturing or other process used to produce such product;

(13) "direct selling" means marketing, distribution and sale of goods or provision
of services through a network of sellers, other than through a permanent retail location;

(14) "Director-General" means the Director-General appointed under
sub-section (2) of section 15;

(15) "District Commission" means a District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 28;

(16) "e-commerce" means buying or selling of goods or services including
digital products over digital or electronic network;

(17) "electronic service provider" means a person who provides technologies
or processes to enable a product seller to engage in advertising or selling goods or
services to a consumer and includes any online market place or online auction sites;

(18) "endorsement", in relation to an advertisement, means—

(i) any message, verbal statement, demonstration; or

(ii) depiction of the name, signature, likeness or other identifiable personal
characteristics of an individual; or

(iii) depiction of the name or seal of any institution or organisation,

which makes the consumer to believe that it reflects the opinion, finding or experience of the
person making such endorsement;

(19) "establishment" includes an advertising agency, commission agent,
manufacturing, trading or any other commercial agency which carries on any business,
trade or profession or any work in connection with or incidental or ancillary to any



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5

commercial activity, trade or profession, or such other class or classes of persons
including public utility entities in the manner as may be prescribed;

(20) "express warranty" means any material statement, affirmation of fact, promise
or description relating to a product or service warranting that it conforms to such
material statement, affirmation, promise or description and includes any sample or
model of a product warranting that the whole of such product conforms to such
sample or model;

(21) "goods" means every kind of movable property and includes "food" as
defined in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards

34 of 2006. Act, 2006;

(22) "harm", in relation to a product liability, includes—

(i) damage to any property, other than the product itself;

(ii) personal injury, illness or death;

(iii) mental agony or emotional distress attendant to personal injury or
illness or damage to property; or

(iv) any loss of consortium or services or other loss resulting from a harm
referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii),

but shall not include any harm caused to a product itself or any damage to the property
on account of breach of warranty conditions or any commercial or economic loss,
including any direct, incidental or consequential loss relating thereto;

(23) "injury" means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body,
mind or property;

(24) "manufacturer" means a person who—

(i) makes any goods or parts thereof; or

(ii) assembles any goods or parts thereof made by others; or

(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made by any
other person;

(25) "mediation" means the process by which a mediator mediates the consumer
disputes;

(26) "mediator" means a mediator referred to in section 75;

(27) "member" includes the President and a member of the National Commission
or a State Commission or a District Commission, as the case may be;

(28) "misleading advertisement" in relation to any product or service, means an
advertisement, which—

(i) falsely describes such product or service; or

(ii) gives a false guarantee to, or is likely to mislead the consumers as to
the nature, substance, quantity or quality of such product or service; or

(iii) conveys an express or implied representation which, if made by the
manufacturer or seller or service provider thereof, would constitute an unfair
trade practice; or

(iv) deliberately conceals important information;

(29) "National Commission" means the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 53;



6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(30) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
term "notify" shall be construed accordingly;

(31) "person" includes—

(i) an individual;

(ii) a firm whether registered or not;

(iii) a Hindu undivided family;

(iv) a co-operative society;

(v) an association of persons whether registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or not; 21 of 1860.

(vi) any corporation, company or a body of individuals whether
incorporated or not;

(vii) any artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses;

(32) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government,
or, as the case may be, the State Government;

(33) "product" means any article or goods or substance or raw material or any
extended cycle of such product, which may be in gaseous, liquid, or solid state
possessing intrinsic value which is capable of delivery either as wholly assembled or
as a component part and is produced for introduction to trade or commerce, but does
not include human tissues, blood, blood products and organs;

(34) "product liability" means the responsibility of a product manufacturer or
product seller, of any product or service, to compensate for any harm caused to a
consumer by such defective product manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services
relating thereto;

(35) "product liability action" means a complaint filed by a person before a
District Commission or State Commission or National Commission, as the case may be,
for claiming compensation for the harm caused to him;

(36) "product manufacturer" means a person who—

(i) makes any product or parts thereof; or

(ii) assembles parts thereof made by others; or

(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any products made by any
other person; or

(iv) makes a product and sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares,
packages, labels, markets, repairs, maintains such product or is otherwise involved
in placing such product for commercial purpose; or

(v) designs, produces, fabricates, constructs or re-manufactures any
product before its sale; or

(vi) being a product seller of a product, is also a manufacturer of such
product;

(37) "product seller", in relation to a product, means a person who, in the course
of business, imports, sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares, packages, labels,
markets, repairs, maintains, or otherwise is involved in placing such product for
commercial purpose and includes—

(i) a manufacturer who is also a product seller; or



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7

(ii) a service provider,

but does not include—

(a) a seller of immovable property, unless such person is engaged in the
sale of constructed house or in the construction of homes or flats;

(b) a provider of professional services in any transaction in which, the
sale or use of a product is only incidental thereto, but furnishing of opinion, skill
or services being the essence of such transaction;

(c) a person who—

(I) acts only in a financial capacity with respect to the sale of the
product;

(II) is not a manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retailer, direct seller
or an electronic service provider;

(III) leases a product, without having a reasonable opportunity to
inspect and discover defects in the product, under a lease arrangement in
which the selection, possession, maintenance, and operation of the
product are controlled by a person other than the lessor;

(38) "product service provider", in relation to a product, means a person who
provides any service in respect of such product;

(39) "regulations" means the regulations made by the National Commission, or
as the case may be, the Central Authority;

(40) "Regulator" means a body or any authority established under any other
law for the time being in force;

(41) "restrictive trade practice" means a trade practice which tends to bring
about manipulation of price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow of supplies in
the market relating to goods or services in such a manner as to impose on the consumers
unjustified costs or restrictions and shall include—

(i) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such goods
or in providing the services which has led or is likely to lead to rise in the price;

(ii) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail of
any goods or, as the case may be, services as condition precedent for buying,
hiring or availing of other goods or services;

(42) "service" means service of any description which is made available to
potential users and includes, but not limited to, the provision of facilities in connection
with banking, financing, insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other
energy, telecom, boarding or lodging or both, housing construction, entertainment,
amusement or the purveying of news or other information, but does not include the
rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract of personal service;

(43) "spurious goods" means such goods which are falsely claimed to be
genuine;

(44) "State Commission" means a State Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 42;

(45) "trader", in relation to any goods, means a person who sells or distributes
any goods for sale and includes the manufacturer thereof, and where such goods are
sold or distributed in package form, includes the packer thereof;

(46) "unfair contract" means a contract between a manufacturer or trader or
service provider on one hand, and a consumer on the other, having such terms which



8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

cause significant change in the rights of such consumer, including the following,
namely:—

(i) requiring manifestly excessive security deposits to be given by a
consumer for the performance of contractual obligations; or

(ii) imposing any penalty on the consumer, for the breach of contract
thereof which is wholly disproportionate to the loss occurred due to such breach
to the other party to the contract; or

(iii) refusing to accept early repayment of debts on payment of applicable
penalty; or

(iv) entitling a party to the contract to terminate such contract unilaterally,
without reasonable cause; or

(v) permitting or has the effect of permitting one party to assign the contract
to the detriment of the other party who is a consumer, without his consent; or

(vi) imposing on the consumer any unreasonable charge, obligation or
condition which puts such consumer to disadvantage;

(47) "unfair trade practice" means a trade practice which, for the purpose of
promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service,
adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including any of the following
practices, namely:—

(i) making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by visible
representation including by means of electronic record, which—

(a) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular standard,
quality, quantity, grade, composition, style or model;

(b) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard,
quality or grade;

(c) falsely represents any re-built, second-hand, renovated,
reconditioned or old goods as new goods;

(d) represents that the goods or services have sponsorship, approval,
performance, characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits which such
goods or services do not have;

(e) represents that the seller or the supplier has a sponsorship or
approval or affiliation which such seller or supplier does not have;

(f) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the need
for, or the usefulness of, any goods or services;

(g) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee of the performance,
efficacy or length of life of a product or of any goods that is not based on
an adequate or proper test thereof:

Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such
warranty or guarantee is based on adequate or proper test, the burden of
proof of such defence shall lie on the person raising such defence;

(h) makes to the public a representation in a form that purports to
be—

(A) a warranty or guarantee of a product or of any goods or
services; or

(B) a promise to replace, maintain or repair an article or any
part thereof or to repeat or continue a service until it has achieved a
specified result,



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9

if such purported warranty or guarantee or promise is materially misleading or if there
is no reasonable prospect that such warranty, guarantee or promise will be carried out;

(i) materially misleads the public concerning the price at which a product or like
products or goods or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or provided, and, for
this purpose, a representation as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price at which
the product or goods or services has or have been sold by sellers or provided by
suppliers generally in the relevant market unless it is clearly specified to be the price at
which the product has been sold or services have been provided by the person by
whom or on whose behalf the representation is made;

(j) gives false or misleading facts disparaging the goods, services or trade of
another person.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause, a statement that is,—

(A) expressed on an article offered or displayed for sale, or on its wrapper or
container; or

(B) expressed on anything attached to, inserted in, or accompanying, an article
offered or displayed for sale, or on anything on which the article is mounted for
display or sale; or

(C) contained in or on anything that is sold, sent, delivered, transmitted or in
any other manner whatsoever made available to a member of the public,

shall be deemed to be a statement made to the public by, and only by, the person who had
caused the statement to be so expressed, made or contained;

(ii) permitting the publication of any advertisement, whether in any
newspaper or otherwise, including by way of electronic record, for the sale or
supply at a bargain price of goods or services that are not intended to be offered
for sale or supply at the bargain price, or for a period that is, and in quantities
that are, reasonable, having regard to the nature of the market in which the
business is carried on, the nature and size of business, and the nature of the
advertisement.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, "bargain price" means,—

(A) a price that is stated in any advertisement to be a bargain price,
by reference to an ordinary price or otherwise; or

(B) a price that a person who reads, hears or sees the advertisement,
would reasonably understand to be a bargain price having regard to the
prices at which the product advertised or like products are ordinarily sold;

(iii) permitting—

(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with the intention of
not providing them as offered or creating impression that something is
being given or offered free of charge when it is fully or partly covered by
the amount charged, in the transaction as a whole;

(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of chance or skill, for
the purpose of promoting, directly or indirectly, the sale, use or supply of
any product or any business interest, except such contest, lottery, game
of chance or skill as may be prescribed;

(c) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering gifts,
prizes or other items free of charge on its closure, the information about
final results of the scheme.



10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, the participants of a scheme shall
be deemed to have been informed of the final results of the scheme where such results are
within a reasonable time published, prominently in the same newspaper in which the scheme
was originally advertised;

(iv) permitting the sale or supply of goods intended to be used, or are of
a kind likely to be used by consumers, knowing or having reason to believe that
the goods do not comply with the standards prescribed by the competent
authority relating to performance, composition, contents, design, constructions,
finishing or packaging as are necessary to prevent or reduce the risk of injury to
the person using the goods;

(v) permitting the hoarding or destruction of goods, or refusal to sell the
goods or to make them available for sale or to provide any service, if such
hoarding or destruction or refusal raises or tends to raise or is intended to raise,
the cost of those or other similar goods or services;

(vi) manufacturing of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale or
adopting deceptive practices in the provision of services;

(vii) not issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for the goods sold or services
rendered in such manner as may be prescribed;

(viii) refusing, after selling goods or rendering services, to take back or
withdraw defective goods or to withdraw or discontinue deficient services and
to refund the consideration thereof, if paid, within the period stipulated in the
bill or cash memo or receipt or in the absence of such stipulation, within a period
of thirty days;

(ix) disclosing to other person any personal information given in
confidence by the consumer unless such disclosure is made in accordance with
the provisions of any law for the time being in force.

CHAPTER II

CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS

Central 3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish with effect from such
Consumer date as it may specify in that notification, the Central Consumer Protection Council to be
Protection
Council. known as the Central Council.

(2) The Central Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following
members, namely:—

(a) the Minister-in-charge of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the Central
Government, who shall be the Chairperson; and

(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed.

Procedure for 4. (1) The Central Council shall meet as and when necessary, but at least one meeting
meetings of of the Council shall be held every year.
Central
Council. (2) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think

fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be
prescribed.

Objects of 5. The objects of the Central Council shall be to render advice on promotion and
Central protection of the consumers' rights under this Act.
Council.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11

6. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification, establish with effect from such State
date as it may specify in such notification, a State Consumer Protection Council for such Consumer
State to be known as the State Council. Protection

Councils.
(2) The State Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members,

namely:—

(a) the Minister-in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the State Government who
shall be the Chairperson;

(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed;

(c) such number of other official or non-official members, not exceeding ten, as
may be nominated by the Central Government.

(3) The State Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings
shall be held every year.

(4) The State Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think
fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business, as may be
prescribed.

7. The objects of every State Council shall be to render advice on promotion and Objects of
protection of consumer rights under this Act within the State. State Council.

8. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish for every District with District
effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a District Consumer Protection Consumer

Council to be known as the District Council. Protection
Council.

(2) The District Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following
members, namely:—

(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever name called), who shall be the
Chairperson; and

(b) such number of other official and non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed.

(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two
meetings shall be held every year.

(4) The District Council shall meet at such time and place within the district as the
Chairperson may think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of
its business as may be prescribed.

9. The objects of every District Council shall be to render advice on promotion and Objects of

protection of consumer rights under this Act within the district. District
Council.

CHAPTER III

CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY

10. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish with effect from such Establishment

date as it may specify in that notification, a Central Consumer Protection Authority to be of Central
Consumer

known as the Central Authority to regulate matters relating to violation of rights of consumers, Protection
unfair trade practices and false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the Authority.
interests of public and consumers and to promote, protect and enforce the rights of consumers
as a class.

(2) The Central Authority shall consist of a Chief Commissioner and such number of
other Commissioners as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government to
exercise the powers and discharge the functions under this Act.



12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(3) The headquarters of the Central Authority shall be at such place in the National
Capital Region of Delhi, and it shall have regional and other offices in any other place in
India as the Central Government may decide.

Qualifications, 11. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the
method of qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of
recruitment,
etc., of Chief office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of the
Commissioner service of the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners of the Central Authority.
and
Commissioners.

Vacancy, etc., 12. No act or proceeding of the Central Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
not to
invalidate (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Authority; or
proceedings
of Central (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chief Commissioner
Authority. or as a Commissioner; or

(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Central Authority not affecting the
merits of the case.

Appointment 13. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Central Authority such number of
of officers, officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its
experts,
professionals functions under this Act.
and other (2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
employees of
Central service of, the officers and other employees of the Central Authority appointed under this
Authority. Act shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) The Central Authority may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by
regulations, such number of experts and professionals of integrity and ability, who have
special knowledge and experience in the areas of consumer rights and welfare, consumer
policy, law, medicine, food safety, health, engineering, product safety, commerce, economics,
public affairs or administration, as it deems necessary to assist it in the discharge of its
functions under this Act.

Procedure of 14. (1) The Central Authority shall regulate the procedure for transaction of its business
Central and allocation of its business amongst the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners as may
Authority.

be specified by regulations.

(2) The Chief Commissioner shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction
and control in respect of all administrative matters of the Central Authority:

Provided that the Chief Commissioner may delegate such of his powers relating to
administrative matters of the Central Authority, as he may think fit, to any Commissioner
(including Commissioner of a regional office) or any other officer of the Central Authority.

Investigation 15. (1) The Central Authority shall have an Investigation Wing headed by a Director-
Wing. General for the purpose of conducting inquiry or investigation under this Act as may be

directed by the Central Authority.

(2) The Central Government may appoint a Director-General and such number of
Additional Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director,
from amongst persons who have experience in investigation and possess such qualifications,
in such manner, as may be prescribed.

(3) Every Additional Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and
Assistant Director shall exercise his powers, and discharge his functions, subject to the
general control, supervision and direction of the Director-General.

(4) The Director-General may delegate all or any of his powers to the Additional
Director-General or Director, Joint Director or Deputy Director or Assistant Director, as the
case may be, while conducting inquiries or investigations under this Act.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13

(5) The inquiries or the investigations made by the Director- General shall be submitted
to the Central Authority in such form, in such manner and within such time, as may be
specified by regulations.

16. The District Collector (by whatever name called) may, on a complaint or on a Power of
reference made to him by the Central Authority or the Commissioner of a regional office, District

inquire into or investigate complaints regarding violation of rights of consumers as a class, Collector.

on matters relating to violations of consumer rights, unfair trade practices and false or
misleading advertisements, within his jurisdiction and submit his report to the Central Authority
or to the Commissioner of a regional office, as the case may be.

17. A complaint relating to violation of consumer rights or unfair trade practices or Complaints to
false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the interests of consumers as a authorities.

class, may be forwarded either in writing or in electronic mode, to any one of the authorities,
namely, the District Collector or the Commissioner of regional office or the Central Authority.

18. (1) The Central Authority shall— Powers and
functions of

(a) protect, promote and enforce the rights of consumers as a class, and prevent Central
violation of consumers rights under this Act; Authority.

(b) prevent unfair trade practices and ensure that no person engages himself in
unfair trade practices;

(c) ensure that no false or misleading advertisement is made of any goods or
services which contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder;

(d) ensure that no person takes part in the publication of any advertisement
which is false or misleading.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Central Authority may, for any of the purposes aforesaid,—

(a) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made into violations of
consumer rights or unfair trade practices, either suo motu or on a complaint received or
on the directions from the Central Government;

(b) file complaints before the District Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, under this Act;

(c) intervene in any proceedings before the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, in respect of any allegation
of violation of consumer rights or unfair trade practices;

(d) review the matters relating to, and the factors inhibiting enjoyment of,
consumer rights, including safeguards provided for the protection of consumers under
any other law for the time being in force and recommend appropriate remedial measures
for their effective implementation;

(e) recommend adoption of international covenants and best international
practices on consumer rights to ensure effective enforcement of consumer rights;

(f) undertake and promote research in the field of consumer rights;

(g) spread and promote awareness on consumer rights;

(h) encourage non-Governmental organisations and other institutions working
in the field of consumer rights to co-operate and work with consumer protection
agencies;

(i) mandate the use of unique and universal goods identifiers in such goods, as
may be necessary, to prevent unfair trade practices and to protect consumers' interest;



14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(j) issue safety notices to alert consumers against dangerous or hazardous or
unsafe goods or services;

(k) advise the Ministries and Departments of the Central and State Governments
on consumer welfare measures;

(l) issue necessary guidelines to prevent unfair trade practices and protect
consumers' interest.

Power of 19. (1) The Central Authority may, after receiving any information or complaint or
Central directions from the Central Government or of its own motion, conduct or cause to be conducted
Authority to
refer matter a preliminary inquiry as to whether there exists a prima facie case of violation of consumer
for rights or any unfair trade practice or any false or misleading advertisement, by any person,
investigation which is prejudicial to the public interest or to the interests of consumers and if it is satisfied
or to other that there exists a prima facie case, it shall cause investigation to be made by the Director-
Regulator.

General or by the District Collector.

(2) Where, after preliminary inquiry, the Central Authority is of the opinion that the
matter is to be dealt with by a Regulator established under any other law for the time being
in force, it may refer such matter to the concerned Regulator along with its report.

(3) For the purposes of investigation under sub-section (1), the Central Authority, the
Director General or the District Collector may call upon a person referred to in
sub-section (1) and also direct him to produce any document or record in his possession.

Power of 20. Where the Central Authority is satisfied on the basis of investigation that there is
Central sufficient evidence to show violation of consumer rights or unfair trade practice by a person,
Authority to it may pass such order as may be necessary, including—
recall goods,
etc. (a) recalling of goods or withdrawal of services which are dangerous, hazardous

or unsafe;

(b) reimbursement of the prices of goods or services so recalled to purchasers of
such goods or services; and

(c) discontinuation of practices which are unfair and prejudicial to consumers'
interest:

Provided that the Central Authority shall give the person an opportunity of being
heard before passing an order under this section.

Power of 21. (1) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any
Central advertisement is false or misleading and is prejudicial to the interest of any consumer or is in
Authority to contravention of consumer rights, it may, by order, issue directions to the concerned trader
issue
directions and or manufacturer or endorser or advertiser or publisher, as the case may be, to discontinue
penalties such advertisement or to modify the same in such manner and within such time as may be
against false specified in that order.
or misleading
advertisements.

(2) Notwithstanding the order passed under sub-section (1), if the Central Authority
is of the opinion that it is necessary to impose a penalty in respect of such false or misleading
advertisement, by a manufacturer or an endorser, it may, by order, impose on manufacturer or
endorser a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees:

Provided that the Central Authority may, for every subsequent contravention by a
manufacturer or endorser, impose a penalty, which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.

(3) Notwithstanding any order under sub-sections (1) and (2), where the Central
Authority deems it necessary, it may, by order, prohibit the endorser of a false or misleading
advertisement from making endorsement of any product or service for a period which may
extend to one year:



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15

Provided that the Central Authority may, for every subsequent contravention, prohibit
such endorser from making endorsement in respect of any product or service for a period
which may extend to three years.

(4) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any person is
found to publish, or is a party to the publication of, a misleading advertisement, it may
impose on such person a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees.

(5) No endorser shall be liable to a penalty under sub-sections (2) and (3) if he has
exercised due diligence to verify the veracity of the claims made in the advertisement regarding
the product or service being endorsed by him.

(6) No person shall be liable to such penalty if he proves that he had published or
arranged for the publication of such advertisement in the ordinary course of his business:

Provided that no such defence shall be available to such person if he had previous
knowledge of the order passed by the Central Authority for withdrawal or modification of
such advertisement.

(7) While determining the penalty under this section, regard shall be had to the
following, namely:—

(a) the population and the area impacted or affected by such offence;

(b) the frequency and duration of such offence;

(c) the vulnerability of the class of persons likely to be adversely affected by
such offence; and

(d) the gross revenue from the sales effected by virtue of such offence.

(8) The Central Authority shall give the person an opportunity of being heard before
an order under this section is passed.

22. (1) For the purpose of conducting an investigation after preliminary inquiry under Search and
sub-section (1) of section 19, the Director-General or any other officer authorised by him in seizure.

this behalf, or the District Collector, as the case may be, may, if he has any reason to believe
that any person has violated any consumer rights or committed unfair trade practice or
causes any false or misleading advertisement to be made, shall,—

(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such premises and search for any
document or record or article or any other form of evidence and seize such document,
record, article or such evidence;

(b) make a note or an inventory of such record or article; or

(c) require any person to produce any record, register or other document or
article.

2 of 1974. (2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to search and
seizure shall apply, as far as may be, for search and seizure under this Act.

(3) Every document, record or article seized under clause (a) of sub-section (1) or
produced under clause (c) of that sub-section shall be returned to the person, from whom
they were seized or who produced the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of
such seizure or production, as the case may be, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom
certified by that person, in such manner as may be prescribed, have been taken.

(4) Where any article seized under sub-section (1) are subject to speedy or natural
decay, the Director-General or such other officer may dispose of the article in such manner as
may be prescribed.

(5) In the case of articles other than the articles referred to in sub-section (4), provisions
contained in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38 shall mutatis mutandis apply in
relation to analysis or tests.



16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

Designation 23. The Central Government may, if it considers necessary, by notification, designate
of any any statutory authority or body to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the
statutory Central Authority referred to in section 10.
authority or
body to
function as
Central
Authority.

Appeal. 24. A person aggrieved by any order passed by the Central Authority under
sections 20 and 21 may file an appeal to the National Commission within a period of thirty
days from the date of receipt of such order.

Grants by 25. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
Central this behalf, make to the Central Authority grants of such sums of money as that Government
Government. may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
Accounts and 26. (1) The Central Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
audit. and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be prescribed

in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

(2) The accounts of the Central Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Central Authority to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Central Authority shall have the same
rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India generally has, in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of  books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the Central Authority.

(4) The accounts of the Central Authority as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government which shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Furnishing of 27. (1) The Central Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form, manner
annual and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its activities
reports, etc. during the previous year and such other reports and returns, as may be directed, and copies

of such report and returns shall be forwarded to the Central Government.

(2) A copy of the annual report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

CHAPTER IV

CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION

Establishment 28. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish a District Consumer
of District Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the District Commission, in each district of
Consumer
Disputes the State:
Redressal Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one
Commission.

District Commission in a district.
(2) Each District Commission shall consist of—

(a) a President; and
(b) not less than two and not more than such number of members as may be

prescribed, in consultation with the Central Government.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17

29. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the Qualifications,
qualifications, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of office, resignation etc., of

and removal of the President and members of the District Commission. President and
members of
District
Commission.

30. The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries and Salaries,
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President, and members of the allowances and

District Commission. other terms
and conditions
of service of
President and
members of
District
Commission.

31. Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of the District Transitional

Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such as provision.

President or, as the case may be, as member till the completion of his term for which he has
been appointed.

32. If, at any time, there is a vacancy in the office of the President or member of a Vacancy in
District  Commission, the State Government may, by notification, direct— office of

member of
(a) any other District Commission specified in that notification to exercise the District

jurisdiction in respect of that district also; or Commission.

(b) the President or a member of any other District Commission specified in that
notification to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the President or
member of that District Commission also.

33. (1) The State Government shall provide the District Commission with such officers Officers and
and other employees as may be required to assist the District Commission in the discharge other

of its functions. employees of
District

(2) The officers and other employees of the District Commission shall discharge their Commission.

functions under the general superintendence of the President of the District Commission.

(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the District Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.

34. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the District Commission shall have Jurisdiction of
jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as District

consideration does not exceed one crore rupees: Commission.

Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may
prescribe such other value, as it deems fit.

(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a District Commission within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction,—

(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than
one, at the time of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on
business or has a branch office or personally works for gain; or

(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the
institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or
has a branch office, or personally works for gain, provided that in such case the
permission of the District Commission is given; or

(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or

(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain.



18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(3) The District Commission shall ordinarily function in the district headquarters and
may perform its functions at such other place in the district, as the State Government may, in
consultation with the State Commission, notify in the Official Gazette from time to time.

Manner in 35. (1) A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
which delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided, may be filed with a District
complaint
shall be made. Commission by—

(a) the consumer,—

(i) to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or such service is provided or agreed to be provided; or

(ii) who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods or service;

(b) any recognised consumer association, whether the consumer to whom such
goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or such service is provided
or agreed to be provided, or who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods
or service, is a member of such association or not;

(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the
same interest, with the permission of the District Commission, on behalf of, or for the
benefit of, all consumers so interested; or

(d) the Central Government, the Central Authority or the State Government, as
the case may be:

Provided that the complaint under this sub-section may be filed electronically in such
manner as may be prescribed.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "recognised consumer
association" means any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the
time being in force.

(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied with such fee
and payable in such manner, including electronic form, as may be prescribed.

Proceedings 36. (1) Every proceeding before the District Commission shall be conducted by the
before President of that Commission and atleast one member thereof, sitting together:
District
Commission. Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till it

is completed, the President and the other member shall continue the proceeding from the
stage at which it was last heard by the previous member.

(2) On receipt of a complaint made under section 35, the District Commission may, by
order, admit the complaint for being proceeded with or reject the same:

Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this section unless an opportunity
of being heard has been given to the complainant:

Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided
within twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint was filed.

(3) Where the District Commission does not decide the issue of admissibility of the
complaint within the period so specified, it shall be deemed to have been admitted.

Reference to 37. (1) At the first hearing of the complaint after its admission, or at any later stage, if
mediation. it appears to the District Commission that there exists elements of a settlement which may be

acceptable to the parties, except in such cases as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties
to give in writing, within five days, consent to have their dispute settled by mediation in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter V.

(2) Where the parties agree for settlement by mediation and give their consent in
writing, the District Commission shall, within five days of receipt of such consent, refer the



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19

matter for mediation, and in such case, the provisions of Chapter V, relating to mediation,
shall apply.

38. (1) The District Commission shall, on admission of a complaint, or in respect of Procedure on
cases referred for mediation on failure of settlement by mediation, proceed with such admission of

complaint. complaint.

(2) Where the complaint relates to any goods, the District Commission shall,—

(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty-one days from the date
of its admission to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint directing him to give
his version of the case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not
exceeding fifteen days as may be granted by it;

(b) if the opposite party on receipt of a complaint referred to him under clause (a)
denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take
any action to represent his case within the time given by the District Commission,
proceed to settle the consumer dispute in the manner specified in clauses (c) to (g);

(c) if the complaint alleges a defect in the goods which cannot be determined
without proper analysis or test of the goods, obtain a sample of the goods from the
complainant, seal it and authenticate it in the manner as may be prescribed and refer
the sample so sealed to the appropriate laboratory along with a direction that such
laboratory to make an analysis or test, whichever may be necessary, with a view to
finding out whether such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the complaint or
from any other defect and to report its findings thereon to the District Commission
within a period of forty-five days of the receipt of the reference or within such extended
period as may be granted by it;

(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to any appropriate laboratory
under clause (c), require the complainant to deposit to the credit of the Commission
such fees as may be specified, for payment to the appropriate laboratory for carrying
out the necessary analysis or test in relation to the goods in question;

(e) remit the amount deposited to its credit under clause (d) to the appropriate
laboratory to enable it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in clause (c) and on
receipt of the report from the appropriate laboratory, it shall forward a copy of the
report along with such remarks as it may feel appropriate to the opposite party;

(f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness of the findings of the appropriate
laboratory, or disputes the correctness of the methods of analysis or test adopted by
the appropriate laboratory, require the opposite party or the complainant to submit in
writing his objections with regard to the report made by the appropriate laboratory;

(g) give a reasonable opportunity to the complainant as well as the opposite
party of being heard as to the correctness or otherwise of the report made by the
appropriate laboratory and also as to the objection made in relation thereto under
clause (f) and issue an appropriate order under section 39.

(3) The District Commission shall, if the complaint admitted by it under sub-section (2)
of section 36 relates to goods in respect of which the procedure specified in sub-section (2)
cannot be followed, or if the complaint relates to any services,—

(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite party directing him to give his
version of the case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding
fifteen days as may be granted by the District Commission;

(b) if the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to him
under clause (a) denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or
omits or fails to take any action to represent his case within the time given by the
District Commission, it shall proceed to settle the consumer dispute—



20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant and
the opposite party, if the opposite party denies or disputes the allegations
contained in the complaint, or

(ii) ex parte on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the
complainant, where the opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent
his case within the time given by the Commission;

(c) decide the complaint on merits if the complainant fails to appear on the date
of hearing.

(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the District Commission may, by
order, require an electronic service provider to provide such information, documents or
records, as may be specified in that order.

(5) No proceedings complying with the procedure laid down in sub-sections (1) and
(2) shall be called in question in any court on the ground that the principles of natural justice
have not been complied with.

(6) Every complaint shall be heard by the District Commission on the basis of affidavit
and documentary evidence placed on record:

Provided that where an application is made for hearing or for examination of parties in
person or through video conferencing, the District Commission may, on sufficient cause
being shown, and after recording its reasons in writing, allow the same.

(7) Every complaint shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made to decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt
of notice by opposite party where the complaint does not require analysis or testing of
commodities and within five months if it requires analysis or testing of commodities:

Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the District Commission
unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded
in writing by the Commission:

Provided further that the District Commission shall make such orders as to the costs
occasioned by the adjournment as may be specified by regulations:

Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period so
specified, the District Commission shall record in writing, the reasons for the same at the time
of disposing of the said complaint.

(8) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District Commission, if
it appears necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.

(9) For the purposes of this section, the District Commission shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a 5 of 1908.
suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or witness
and examining the witness on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material
object as evidence;

(c) receiving of evidence on affidavits;

(d) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the
appropriate laboratory or from any other relevant source;

(e) issuing of commissions for the examination of any witness, or document;
and



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21

(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.

(10) Every proceeding before the District Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial
45 of 1860. proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the

District Commission shall be deemed to be a criminal court for the purposes of section 195
2 of 1974. and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(11) Where the complainant is a consumer referred to in sub-clause (v) of clause (5) of
section 2, the provisions of Order I Rule 8 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,

5 of 1908. 1908 shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or decree
shall be construed as a reference to a complaint or the order of the District Commission
thereon.

(12) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the opposite party
against whom the complaint has been filed, the provisions of Order XXII of the First Schedule

5 of 1908. to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply subject to the modification that every
reference therein to the plaintiff and the defendant shall be construed as reference to a
complainant or the opposite party, as the case may be.

39. (1) Where the District Commission is satisfied that the goods complained against Findings of
suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations District

contained in the complaint about the services or any unfair trade practices, or claims for Commission.

compensation under product liability are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party
directing him to do one or more of the following, namely:—

(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from the
goods in question;

(b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall be
free from any defect;

(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid
by the complainant along with such interest on such price or charges as may be
decided;

(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer
for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite
party:

Provided that the District Commission shall have the power to grant punitive
damages in such circumstances as it deems fit;

(e) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation in a product
liability action under Chapter VI;

(f) to remove the defects in goods or deficiencies in the services in question;

(g) to discontinue the unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practice and not to
repeat them;

(h) not to offer the hazardous or unsafe goods for sale;

(i) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being offered for sale;

(j) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services
which are hazardous in nature;

(k) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or
injury has been suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable
conveniently:

Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than
twenty-five per cent. of the value of such defective goods sold or service provided, as
the case may be, to such consumers;



22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(l) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise the effect of misleading
advertisement at the cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading
advertisement;

(m) to provide for adequate costs to parties; and

(n) to cease and desist from issuing any misleading advertisement.

(2) Any amount obtained under sub-section (1) shall be credited to such fund and
utilised in such manner as may be prescribed.

(3) In any proceeding conducted by the President and a member and if they differ on
any point or points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer the
same to another member for hearing on such point or points and the opinion of the majority
shall be the order of the District Commission:

Provided that the other member shall give his opinion on such point or points referred
to him within a period of one month from the date of such reference.

(4) Every order made by the District Commission under sub-section (1) shall be signed
by the President and the member who conducted the proceeding:

Provided that where the order is made as per majority opinion under sub-section (3),
such order shall also be signed by the other member.

Review by 40. The District Commission shall have the power to review any of the order passed
District by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own motion or on an
Commission application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order.
in certain
cases.

Appeal 41. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Commission may prefer an
against order appeal against such order to the State Commission on the grounds of facts or law within a
of District period of forty-five days from the date of the order, in such form and manner, as may be
Commission.

prescribed:

Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period:

Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the District Commission, shall be entertained by the State Commission
unless the appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed:

Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any order passed under sub-section (1) of
section 81 by the District Commission pursuant to a settlement by mediation under
section 80.

Establishment 42. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish a State Consumer
of State Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the State Commission, in the State.
Consumer
Disputes (2) The State Commission shall ordinarily function at the State capital and perform its
Redressal functions at such other places as the State Government may in consultation with the State
Commission.

Commission notify in the Official Gazette:

Provided that the State Government may, by notification, establish regional benches
of the State Commission, at such places, as it deems fit.

(3) Each State Commission shall consist of—

(a) a President; and

(b) not less than four or not more than such number of members as may be
prescribed in consultation with the Central Government.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23

43. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the Qualifications,

qualification for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of etc., of
President and

office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the State Commission. members of
State
Commission.

44. The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries and Salaries,
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the allowances and
State Commission. other terms

and conditions
of service of
President and
members of
State
Commission.

45. Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of the State Transitional

Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such, as provision.

President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term.

46. (1) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers Officers and
and other employees required to assist the State Commission in the discharge of its functions employees of

and provide the Commission with such officers and other employees as it may think fit. State
Commission.

(2) The officers and other employees of the State Commission shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the President.

(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the State Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.

47. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State Commission shall have Jurisdiction of
jurisdiction— State

Commission.
(a) to entertain—

(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
consideration, exceeds rupees one crore, but does not exceed rupees ten crore:

Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do,
it may prescribe such other value, as it deems fit;

(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or
services paid as consideration does not exceed ten crore rupees;

(iii) appeals against the orders of any District Commission within the
State; and

(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute
which is pending before or has been decided by any District Commission within the
State, where it appears to the State Commission that such District Commission has
exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so
vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.

(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof, and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more
members as the President may deem fit:

Provided that the senior-most member shall preside over the Bench.

(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are
equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference
to the President who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing
on such point or points by one or more of the other members and such point or points shall



24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it:

Provided that the President or the other members, as the case may be, shall give
opinion on the point or points so referred within a period of one month from the date of such
reference.

(4) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the limits of whose
jurisdiction,—

(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than
one, at the time of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on
business or has a branch office or personally works for gain; or

(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the
institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or
has a branch office or personally works for gain, provided in such case, the permission
of the State Commission is given; or

(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or

(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain.
Transfer of 48. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State Commission
cases. may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending before a District

Commission to another District Commission within the State if the interest of justice so
requires.

Procedure 49. (1) The provisions relating to complaints under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall,
applicable to with such modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the disposal of complaints by
State the State Commission.
Commission.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1),  the State Commission may
also declare any terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer, to be null and void.

Review by 50. The State Commission shall have the power to review any of the order passed by
State it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own motion or on an
Commission in application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order.
certain cases.

Appeal to 51. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Commission in exercise of
National its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 47
Commission. may prefer an appeal against such order to the National Commission within a period of thirty

days from the date of the order in such form and manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that the National Commission shall not entertain the appeal after the expiry
of the said period of thirty days unless it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period:

Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission
unless the appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed.

(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act or by any other law for the
time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the National Commission from any order passed in
appeal by any State Commission, if the National Commission is satisfied that the case
involves a substantial question of law.

(3) In an appeal involving a question of law, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely
state the substantial question of law involved in the appeal.

(4) Where the National Commission is satisfied that a substantial question of law is
involved in any case, it shall formulate that question and hear the appeal on that question:



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the
power of the National Commission to hear, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the appeal
on any other substantial question of law, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question
of law.

(5) An appeal may lie to the National Commission under this section from an order
passed ex parte by the State Commission.

52. An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National Commission, as the Hearing of
case may be, shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made appeal.

to dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission:

Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the State Commission or
the National Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficient cause is shown and the
reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Commission:

Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case
may be, shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment, as may be
specified by regulations:

Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so
specified, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall
record in writing the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said appeal.

53. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a National Consumer Establishment
Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the National Commission. of National

Consumer
(2) The National Commission shall ordinarily function at the National Capital Region Disputes

and perform its functions at such other places as the Central Government may in consultation Redressal
Commission.

with the National Commission notify in the Official Gazette:

Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, establish regional Benches
of the National Commission, at such places, as it deems fit.

54. The National Commission shall consist of— Composition
of National

(a) a President; and Commission.

(b) not less than four and not more than such number of members as may be
prescribed.

55. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for Qualifications,
qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal etc., of

and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the National President and
members of

Commission: National

Provided that the President and members of the National Commission shall hold office Commission.

for such term as specified in the rules made by the Central Government but not exceeding
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:

Provided further that no President or members shall hold office as such after he has
attained such age as specified in the rules made by the Central Government which shall not
exceed,—

(a) in the case of the President, the age of seventy years;

(b) in the case of any other member, the age of sixty-seven years.

(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of
President and members of the National Commission shall be varied to his disadvantage after
his appointment.



26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

Transitional 56. The President and every other member appointed immediately before the
provision. commencement of section 177 of the Finance Act, 2017 shall continue to be governed by the 7 of 2017.

provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and the rules made thereunder as if this Act 68 of 1986.

had not come into force.

Other officers 57. (1) The Central Government shall provide, in consultation with the President of the
and National Commission, such number of officers and other employees to assist the National
employees of
National Commission in the discharge of its functions as it may think fit.
Commission. (2) The officers and other employees of the National Commission shall discharge their

functions under the general superintendence of the President of the National Commission.

(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the National Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.

Jurisdiction of 58. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have
National jurisdiction—
Commission.

(a) to entertain—

(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
consideration exceeds rupees ten crore:

Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do,
it may prescribe such other value, as it deems fit;

(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or
services paid as consideration exceeds ten crore rupees;

(iii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission;

(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central Authority;  and

(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute
which is pending before or has been decided by any State Commission where it
appears to the National Commission that such State Commission has exercised a
jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or
has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.

(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more
members as he may deem fit:

Provided that the senior-most member of the Bench shall preside over the Bench.

(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are
equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference
to the President who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing
on such point or points by one or more of the other members and such point or points shall
be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it:

Provided that the President or the other member, as the case may be, shall give opinion
on the point or points so referred within a period of two months from the date of such
reference.

Procedure 59. (1) The provisions relating to complaints under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall,
applicable to with such modifications as may be considered necessary, be applicable to the disposal of
National complaints by the National Commission.
Commission.

(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the National Commission may also declare
any terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer to be null and void.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27

60. The National Commission shall have the power to review any of the order passed Review by

by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own motion or on an National
Commission in

application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. certain cases.

61. Where an order is passed by the National Commission ex parte, the aggrieved Power to set
party may make an application to the Commission for setting aside such order. aside ex parte

orders.

62. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the National Commission Transfer of
may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any complaint pending cases.

before the District Commission of one State to a District Commission of another State or
before one State Commission to another State Commission.

63. When the office of President of the National Commission is vacant or a person Vacancy in
occupying such office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of office of

his office, these shall be performed by the senior-most member of the National Commission: President of
National

Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court or a person who has been a Commission.

Judicial Member is a member of the National Commission, such member or where the number
of such members is more than one, the senior-most person amongst such members, shall
preside over the National Commission in the absence of President of that Commission.

64. No act or proceeding of the District Commission, the State Commission or the Vacancies or
National Commission shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst defects in

its members or any defect in the constitution thereof. appointment
not to
invalidate
orders.

65. (1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served by delivering or Service of
transmitting a copy thereof by registered post acknowledgment due addressed to opposite notice, etc.

party against whom complaint is made or to the complainant by speed post or by such
courier service, approved by the District Commission, the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, or by any other mode of transmission of documents
including electronic means.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the notice required
by this Act may be served on an electronic service provider at the address provided by it on
the electronic platform from where it provides its services as such and for this purpose, the
electronic service provider shall designate a nodal officer to accept and process such notices.

(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the
opposite party or his agent or, as the case may be, by the complainant is received by the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be,
or postal article containing the notice is received back by such District Commission, State
Commission or the National Commission, with an endorsement purporting to have been
made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the courier service to the effect
that the opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take delivery of the postal
article containing the notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other means specified
in sub-section (1) when tendered or transmitted to him, the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall declare that the notice
has been duly served on the opposite party or to the complainant, as the case may be:

Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by
registered post acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub-section shall be
made notwithstanding the fact that the acknowledgment has been lost or misplaced, or for
any other reason, has not been received by the District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may be, within thirty days from the date of issue of
notice.



28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant, as the
case may be, shall be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the
opposite party, to the place where business or profession is carried on, and in case of the
complainant, the place where such person actually and voluntarily resides.

Experts to 66. Where the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, on
assist an application by a complainant or otherwise, is of the opinion that it involves the larger
National
Commission interest of consumers, it may direct any individual or organisation or expert to assist the
or State National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be.
Commission.

Appeal against 67. Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Commission in exercise
order of of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58,
National
Commission. may prefer an appeal against such order to the Supreme Court within a period of thirty days

from the date of the order:

Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period:

Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Court
unless that person has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed.

Finality of 68. Every order of a District Commission or the State Commission or the National
orders. Commission, as the case may be, shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order

under the provisions of this Act, be final.

Limitation 69. (1) The District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission
period. shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the

cause of action has arisen.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a complaint may be
entertained after the period specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant satisfies the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be,
that he had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within such period:

Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the District Commission
or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, records its reasons
for condoning such delay.

Administrative 70. (1) The National Commission shall have the authority to lay down such adequate
control. standards in consultation with the Central Government from time to time, for better protection

of the interests of consumers and for that purpose, shall have administrative control over all
the State Commissions in the following matters, namely:—

(a) monitoring performance of the State Commissions in terms of their disposal
by calling for periodical returns regarding the institution, disposal and pendency of
cases;

(b) investigating into any allegations against the President and members of a
State Commission and submitting inquiry report to the State Government concerned
along with copy endorsed to the Central Government for necessary action;

(c) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the
hearing of matters, prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the
opposite parties, furnishing of  english translation of judgments written in any language,
speedy grant of copies of documents;



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29

(d) overseeing the functioning of the State Commission or the District
Commission either by way of inspection or by any other means, as the National
Commission may like to order from time to time, to ensure that the objects and purposes
of the Act are best served and the standards set by the National Commission are
implemented without interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom.

(2) There shall be a monitoring cell to be constituted by the President of the National
Commission to oversee the functioning of the State Commissions from the administrative
point of view.

(3) The State Commission shall have administrative control over all the District
Commissions within its jurisdiction in all matters referred to in sub-section (1).

(4) The National Commission and the State Commissions shall furnish to the Central
Government periodically or as and when required, any information including the pendency
of cases in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

(5) The State Commission shall furnish, periodically or as and when required to the
State Government any information including pendency of cases in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.

71. Every order made by a District Commission, State Commission or the National Enforcement
Commission shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a Court of orders of

in a suit before it and the provisions of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil District
Commission,

5 of 1908. Procedure, 1908 shall, as far as may be, applicable, subject to the modification that every State
reference therein to the decree shall be construed as reference to the order made under this Commission
Act. and National

Commission.

72. (1) Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the District Commission or the Penalty for
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall be punishable with non-

imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month, but which may extend to compliance of
order.

three years, or with fine, which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees, but
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.

2 of 1974. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be,
shall have the power of a Judicial Magistrate of first class for the trial of offences under
sub-section (1), and on conferment of such powers, the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a Judicial
Magistrate of first class for the purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(3) Save as otherwise provided, the offences under sub-section (1) shall be tried
summarily by the District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be.

2 of 1974. 73. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, Appeal against
where an order is passed under sub-section (1) of section 72, an appeal shall lie, both on order passed

facts and on law from— under section 72.

(a) the order made by the District Commission to the State Commission;

(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; and

(c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court.

 (2) Except as provided in sub-section (1), no appeal shall lie before any court, from
any order of a District Commission or a State Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be.

(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days
from the date of order of a District Commission or a State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be:



30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

Provided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the Supreme Court,
as the case may be, may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days,
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the
said period of thirty days.

CHAPTER V

MEDIATION

Establishment 74. (1) The State Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation
of consumer cell to be attached to each of the District Commissions and the State Commissions of that
mediation
cell. State.

(2) The Central Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation cell
to be attached to the National Commission and each of the regional Benches.

(3) A consumer mediation cell shall consist of such persons as may be prescribed.

(4) Every consumer mediation cell shall maintain—

(a) a list of empanelled mediators;

(b) a list of cases handled by the cell;

(c) record of proceeding; and

(d) any other information as may be specified by regulations.

(5) Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a quarterly report to the District
Commission, State Commission or the National Commission to which it is attached, in the
manner specified by regulations.

Empanelment 75. (1) For the purpose of mediation, the National Commission or the State Commission
of mediators. or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of the mediators to be

maintained by the consumer mediation cell attached to it, on the recommendation of a
selection committee consisting of the President and a member of that Commission.

(2) The qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the
procedure for empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to
empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for
empanelled mediators, the grounds on which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators
shall be removed or empanelment shall be cancelled and other matters relating thereto, shall
be such as may be specified by regulations.

(3) The panel of mediators prepared under sub-section (1) shall be valid for a period of
five years, and the empanelled mediators shall be eligible to be considered for re-empanelment
for another term, subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations.

Nomination of 76. The District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission shall,
mediators while nominating any person from the panel of mediators referred to in section 75, consider
from panel. his suitability for resolving the consumer dispute involved.

Duty of 77. It shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose—
mediator to (a) any personal, professional or financial interest in the outcome of the consumer
disclose
certain facts. dispute;

(b) the circumstances which may give rise to a justifiable doubt as to his
independence or impartiality;  and

(c) such other facts as may be specified by regulations.

Replacement 78. Where the District Commission or the State Commission or the National
of mediator Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied, on the information furnished by the mediator or
in certain on the information received from any other person including parties to the complaint and
cases.

after hearing the mediator, it shall replace such mediator by another mediator.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31

79. (1) The mediation shall be held in the consumer mediation cell attached to the Procedure for
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be. mediation.

(2) Where a consumer dispute is referred for mediation by the District Commission or
the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the mediator nominated
by such Commission shall have regard to the rights and obligations of the parties, the
usages of trade, if any, the circumstances giving rise to the consumer dispute and such other
relevant factors, as he may deem necessary and shall be guided by the principles of natural
justice while carrying out mediation.

(3) The mediator so nominated shall conduct mediation within such time and in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.

80. (1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is reached between the parties with Settlement
respect to all of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or with respect to only some of through
the issues, the terms of such agreement shall be reduced to writing accordingly, and signed mediation.

by the parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives.

(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the
signed agreement along with such report to the concerned Commission.

(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified time or the
mediator is of the opinion that settlement is not possible, he shall prepare his report
accordingly and submit the same to the concerned Commission.

81. (1) The District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, Recording
as the case may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of the settlement report, pass settlement and

suitable order recording such settlement of consumer dispute and dispose of the matter passing of
order.

accordingly.

(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District Commission or the
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record settlement of
the issues which have been so settled and continue to hear other issues involved in such
consumer dispute.

(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the District
Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall
continue to hear all the issues involved in such consumer dispute.

CHAPTER VI

PRODUCT LIABILITY

82. This Chapter shall apply to every claim for compensation under a product liability Application of
action by a complainant for any harm caused by a defective product manufactured by a Chapter.

product manufacturer or serviced by a product service provider or sold by a product seller.

83. A product liability action may be brought by a complainant against a product Product
manufacturer or a product service provider or a product seller, as the case may be, for any liability

harm caused to him on account of a defective product. action.

84. (1) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action, if— Liability of
product

(a) the product contains a manufacturing defect; or manufacturer.

(b) the product is defective in design; or

(c) there is a deviation from manufacturing specifications; or

(d) the product does not conform to the express warranty; or

(e) the product fails to contain adequate instructions of correct usage to prevent
any harm or any warning regarding improper or incorrect usage.



32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(2) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action even if he proves
that he was not negligent or fraudulent in making the express warranty of a product.

Liability of 85. A product service provider shall be liable in a product liability action, if—
product
service (a) the service provided by him was faulty or imperfect or deficient or inadequate
provider. in quality, nature or manner of performance which is required to be provided by or

under any law for the time being in force, or pursuant to any contract or otherwise; or

(b) there was an act of omission or commission or negligence or conscious
withholding any information which caused harm; or

(c) the service provider did not issue adequate instructions or warnings to
prevent any harm; or

(d) the service did not conform to express warranty or the terms and conditions
of the contract.

Liability of 86. A product seller who is not a product manufacturer shall be liable in a product
product sellers. liability action, if—

(a) he has exercised substantial control over the designing, testing,
manufacturing, packaging or labelling of a product that caused harm; or

(b) he has altered or modified the product and such alteration or modification
was the substantial factor in causing the harm; or

(c) he has made an express warranty of a product independent of any express
warranty made by a manufacturer and such product failed to conform to the express
warranty made by the product seller which caused the harm; or

(d) the product has been sold by him and the identity of product manufacturer
of such product is not known, or if known, the service of notice or process or warrant
cannot be effected on him or he is not subject to the law which is in force in India or the
order, if any, passed or to be passed cannot be enforced against him; or

(e) he failed to exercise reasonable care in assembling, inspecting or maintaining
such product or he did not pass on the warnings or instructions of the product
manufacturer regarding the dangers involved or proper usage of the product while
selling such product and such failure was the proximate cause of the harm.

Exceptions to 87. (1) A product liability action cannot be brought against the product seller if, at the
product time of harm, the product was misused, altered, or modified.
liability
action. (2) In any product liability action based on the failure to provide adequate warnings or

instructions, the product manufacturer shall not be liable, if—

(a) the product was purchased by an employer for use at the workplace and the
product manufacturer had provided warnings or instructions to such employer;

(b) the product was sold as a component or material to be used in another
product and necessary warnings or instructions were given by the product manufacturer
to the purchaser of such component or material, but the harm was caused to the
complainant by use of the end product in which such component or material was
used;

(c) the product was one which was legally meant to be used or dispensed only
by or under the supervision of an expert or a class of experts and the product
manufacturer had employed reasonable means to give the warnings or instructions for
usage of such product to such expert or class of experts; or

(d) the complainant, while using such product, was under the influence of alcohol
or any prescription drug which had not been prescribed by a medical practitioner.



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33

(3) A product manufacturer shall not be liable for failure to instruct or warn about a
danger which is obvious or commonly known to the user or consumer of such product or
which, such user or consumer, ought to have known, taking into account the characteristics
of such product.

CHAPTER VII

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

88. Whoever, fails to comply with any direction of the Central Authority under Penalty for
sections 20 and 21, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six non-

months or with fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees, or with both. compliance of
direction of
Central
Authority.

89. Any manufacturer or service provider who causes a false or misleading Punishment
advertisement to be made which is prejudicial to the interest of consumers shall be punished for false or

with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend misleading
advertisement.

to ten lakh rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.

90. (1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for Punishment

sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any product containing an adulterant shall be for
manufacturing

punished, if such act— for sale or

(a) does not result in any injury to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term storing, selling
or distributing

which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees; or importing
products

(b) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with containing
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend adulterant.
to three lakh rupees;

(c) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees; and

(d) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with
fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.

(2) The offences under clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and
non-bailable.

(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of
first conviction, suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section,
under any law for the time being in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second
or subsequent conviction, cancel the licence.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(a) "adulterant" means any material including extraneous matter which is
employed or used for making a product unsafe;

(b) "grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 320
45 of 1860. of the Indian Penal Code.

91. (1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for Punishment
sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any spurious goods shall be punished, if such for

act— manufacturing
for sale or for

(a) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with storing or
selling or

imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend distributing or
to three lakh rupees; importing

spurious goods.



34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(b) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees;

(c) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than seven years, but may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.

(2) The offences under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and
non-bailable.

(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of
first conviction, suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section,
under any law for the time being in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second
or subsequent conviction, cancel the licence.

Cognizance of 92. No cognizance shall be taken by a competent court of any offence under sections 88
offence by and 89 except on a complaint filed by the Central Authority or any officer authorised by it in
court. this behalf.

Vexatious 93. The Director General or any other officer, exercising powers under section 22, who
search. knows that there are no reasonable grounds for so doing, and yet—

(a) searches, or causes to be searched any premises; or

(b) seizes any record, register or other document or article,

shall, for every such offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.

CHAPTER VIII

MISCELLANEOUS

Measures to 94. For the purposes of preventing unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling
prevent unfair and also to protect the interest and rights of consumers, the Central Government may take
trade
practices in such measures in the manner as may be prescribed.
e-commerce,
direct selling,
etc.
Presidents, 95. The Presidents and members of the District Commission, the State Commission
members, and the National Commission, and officers and other employees thereof, the Chief
Chief
Commissioner, Commissioner and the Commissioner of the Central Authority, the Director General, the
Commissioner Additional Director General, the Director, the Joint Director, the Deputy Director and the
and certain Assistant Director and all other officers and employees of the Central Authority and other
officers to be persons performing any duty under this Act, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance
public
servants. of any of the provisions of this Act, shall be deemed to be public servants within the

meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860.

Compounding 96. (1) Any offence punishable under sections 88 and 89, may, either before or after
of offences. the institution of the prosecution, be compounded, on payment of such amount as may be

prescribed:

Provided that no compounding of such offence shall be made without the leave of the
court before which a complaint has been filed under section 92:

Provided further that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of
the fine, which may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded.

(2) The Central Authority or any officer as may be specially authorised by him in this
behalf, may compound offences under sub-section  (1).



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35

(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to person who commits the same or similar
offence, within a period of three years from the date on which the first offence, committed by
him, was compounded.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent offence
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was
previously compounded, shall be deemed to be a first offence.

(4) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), no proceeding or
further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the
offence so compounded.

(5) The acceptance of the sum of money for compounding an offence in accordance
with sub-section (1)  by the Central Authority or an officer of the Central Authority empowered
in this behalf shall be deemed to amount to an acquittal within the meaning of the Code of

2 of 1974. Criminal Procedure, 1973.

97. The penalty collected under section 21 and the amount collected under section 96 Manner of

shall be credited to such fund as may be prescribed. crediting
penalty.

98. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Presidents and Protection of

members of the District Commission, the State Commission and the National Commission, action taken
in good faith.

the Chief Commissioner, the Commissioner, any officer or employee and other person
performing any duty under this Act, for any act which is in good faith done or intended to be
done in pursuance of this Act or under any rule or order made thereunder.

99. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Central Authority, Power to give
shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound directions by
by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to Central

Government.
it from time to time:

Provided that the Central Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity
to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.

(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.

100. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the Act not in
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. derogation of

any other law.

101. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out any Power of
of the provisions contained in this Act. Central

Government
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide to make rules.

for, —

(a) the other class or classes of persons including public utility entities under
clause (19) of section 2;

(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill which are to be exempted under
item (b) of sub-clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2;

(c) the manner of issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for goods sold or services
rendered under sub-clause (vii) of clause (47) of section 2;

(d) the number of other official or non-official members of the Central Council
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 3;

(e) the time and place of meeting of Central Council and the procedure for the
transaction of its business under sub-section (2) of section 4;

(f) the number of Commissioners in the Central Authority under sub-section (2)
of section 10;



36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(g) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of
appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners
of the Central Authority under section 11;

(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the officers and other employees of the Central Authority under
sub-section (2) of section 13;

(i) the qualifications for appointment of Director General, Additional Director
General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director and the manner
of appointment under sub-section (2) of section 15;

(j) the manner of taking copies or extracts of document, record or article seized or
produced before returning to the person under sub-section (3) of section 22;

(k) the officer and the manner of disposing of articles which are subject to
speedy or natural decay under sub-section (4) of section 22;

(l) the form and manner for preparing annual statement of accounts by the
Central Authority in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
under sub-section (1) of section 26;

(m) the form in which, and the time within which, an annual report, other reports
and returns may be prepared by the Central Authority under sub-section (1) of
section 27;

(n) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for
appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of President and members of the
District Commission under section 29;

(o) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the District
Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints under proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 34;

(p) the manner of electronically filing complaint under the proviso to sub-section (1)
of section 35;

(q) the fee, electronic form and the manner of payment of fee for filing complaint
under sub-section (2) of section 35;

(r) the cases which may not be referred for settlement by mediation under
sub-section (1) of section 37;

(s) the manner of authentication of goods sampled in case of the National
Commission under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38;

(t) any other matter which may be prescribed under clause (f) of sub-section (9)
of section 38;

(u) the fund where the amount obtained may be credited and the manner of
utilisation of such amount under sub-section (2) of section 39;

(v) the form and the manner in which appeal may be preferred to the State
Commission under section 41;

(w) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for
appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President and members of
the State Commission under section 43;

(x) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the State Commission
shall have jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1)
of section 47;



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37

(y) the form and manner of filing appeal to the National Commission, and the
manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before filing appeal, under
sub-section (1) of section 51;

(z) the number of members of the National Commission under clause (b) of
section 54;

 (za) the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances,
resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the President and
members of the National Commission under sub-section (1) of section 55;

(zb) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the National Commission under
sub-section (3) of section 57;

(zc) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the National
Commission shall have jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 58;

(zd) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount under the second
proviso to section 67;

(ze) the form in which the National Commission and the State Commission shall
furnish information to the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 70;

(zf) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of
section 74;

(zg) the measures to be taken by the Central Government to prevent unfair trade
practices in e-commerce, direct selling under section 94;

(zh) the amount for compounding offences under sub-section (1) of section 96;
(zi) the fund to which the penalty and amount collected shall be credited under

section 97; and
(zj) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which

provisions are to be, or may be, made by rules.
102. (1) The State Governments may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the Power of

provisions of this Act: State
Government

Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules in respect of all or any of to make rules.
the matters with respect to which the State Government may make rules under this section,
and where any such model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they shall
apply to the State until the rules in respect of that matter is made by the State Government
and while making any such rules, so far as is practicable, they shall conform to such model
rules.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the other class or classes of persons including public utility entities under
clause (19) of section 2;

(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill which are to be exempted under
item (b) of sub-clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2;

(c) the number of other official or non-official members of the State Council
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 6;

(d) the time and place of meeting of the State Council and the procedure for the
transaction of its business under sub-section (4) of section 6;

(e) the number of other official and non-official members of District Council
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 8;

(f) the time and place of meeting of the District Council and procedure for the
transaction of its business under sub-section (4) of section 8;



38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(g) the number of members of the District Commission under clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section 28;

(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the President and members of the District Commission under section 30;

(i) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the District Commission under
sub-section (3) of section 33;

(j) the manner of authentication of goods sampled by the State Commission and
the District Commission under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38;

(k) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before filing appeal
under second proviso to section 41;

(l) the number of members of the State Commission under sub-section (3) of
section 42;

(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the President and members of the State Commission under section 44;

(n) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the State Commission under
sub-section (3) of section 46;

(o) the form in which the State Commission shall furnish information to the State
Government under sub-section (5) of section 70;

(p) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of
section 74;

(q) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed, or in respect of which
provisions are to be, or may be, made by rules.

Power of 103. (1) The National Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central
National Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for
Commission
to make all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to
regulations. the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may make provisions for—

(a) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by the District Commission under
the second proviso to sub-section (7) of section 38;

(b) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, under the second proviso to section 52;

(c) the maintenance of any other information by the consumer mediation cell
under sub-section (4) of section 74;

(d) the manner of submission of quarterly report by consumer mediation cell to
the District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission under
sub-section (5) of section 74;

(e) the qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the
procedure for empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee
payable to empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code
of conduct for empanelled mediators, the grounds on which, and the manner in which,
empanelled mediators shall be removed or empanelment shall be cancelled and the
other matters relating thereto under sub-section (2) of section 75;



SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39

(f) the conditions for re-empanelment of mediators for another term under
sub-section (3) of section 75;

(g) the other facts to be disclosed by mediators under clause (c) of section 77;

(h) the time within which, and the manner in which, mediation may be conducted
under sub-section (3) of section 79; and

(i) such other matter for which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulation.

104. (1) The Central Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Power of
Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act, for the purpose Central

Authority to
of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. make

regulations.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such

regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the procedure for engaging experts and professionals and the number of
such experts and professionals under sub-section (3) of section 13;

(b) the procedure for transaction of business and the allocation of business of
the Chief Commissioner and Commissioner under sub-section (1) of section 14;

(c) the form, manner and time within which, inquiries or investigation made by
the Director-General shall be submitted to the Central Authority under sub-section (5)
of section 15; and

(d) such other matter for which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulation.

105. (1) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as Rules and
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total regulations to

be laid before
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive each House of
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the Parliament.
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.

(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

106. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Power to
Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent remove

difficulties.
with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:

 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.

68 of 1986. 107. (1) The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is hereby repealed. Repeal and
savings.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to
have been done or taken under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.



40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 1]

(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to 10 of 1897.

the effect of repeal.

————

DR. G.  NARAYANA  RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.

UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.

MGIPMRND—2606GI(S3)—09-08-2019.






रजजस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 
  
 

 

xxxGIDHxxx 
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-xअxx.G-1ID6E0x7x2x 020-220546

CG-DL-E-16072020-220546

असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग II—खण्ड 3—उप-खण्ड (ii)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   2074] नई ददल्ली,  बधुर्ार, जुलाई 15, 2020/ आषाढ़ 24, 1942  
No. 2074] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY,  JULY 15, 2020/ASHADHA 24, 1942  
 

उपभोक्ता मामल,े खाद्य और सार्जव जनक जर्तरण मतं्रालय 

(उपभोक्ता मामल ेजर्भाग) 

अजधसचूना 

नई ददल्ली, 15 जुलाई, 2020 

का.आ. 2351(अ).—कें द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) की धारा 1 की 

उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करत ेहुए, 20 जुलाई, 2020 को उस तारीख के रूप म ें जनयत करती ह ैजजसको 

उक्त अजधजनयम के जनम्नजलजखत उपबंध प्ररृ्त्त होंग,े अथावत:्- 

अध्याय धारा 

I धारा 2  

[खंड(4), खंड(13), खंड(14), खंड(16), खंड(40) के जसर्ाय] 

II धारा 3 से 9 (दोनों धाराएं सजममजलत); 

IV धारा 28 से 73 (दोनों धाराएं सजममजलत); 

[धारा 58 की उप-धारा (1) के खंड (क) के उपखंड- (iv) के जसर्ाय] 

V धारा 74 से 81 (दोनों  धाराएं सजममजलत ); 

VI धारा 82 से 87 (दोनों  धाराएं सजममजलत ); 

VII धारा 90 और  91; 

[ धारा 88, धारा 89, धारा 92 और धारा 93 के जसर्ाय] 

3150 GI/2020 (1) 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 

 VIII -धारा 95, धारा 98, धारा 100,  

 -धारा 101  

  [उप-धारा 2 के खंड (च) से (ड) तथा खंड (यछ), (यज) और (यझ) के जसर्ाय]    

 -धारा 102,  धारा 103,  धारा 105,  धारा 106,  धारा 107 

 [ धारा 94,  धारा 96,  धारा 97,  धारा 99,  धारा 104 के जसर्ाय] 

 

[फा. सं. जे-9/1/2020-सीपीयू] 

अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर् 

 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 

(Department of Consumer Affairs) 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15th July, 2020 

S.O. 2351(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central Government hereby appoints the 20th day of July, 2020 as the date on 
which the following provisions of the said Act shall come into force, namely:- 

Chapter Sections 

I Section 2  
[Except clauses (4), (13), (14), (16), (40)] 

II Sections 3 to 9 (both inclusive); 

IV Sections 28 to 73 (both inclusive); 
[Except sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58.] 

V Sections 74 to 81 (both inclusive); 

VI Sections 82 to 87 (both inclusive); 

VII Sections 90 and  91; 
[Except sections 88,89,92 & 93] 

VIII -Sections 95, 98, 100,  
-Section101  
[Except clauses (f) to (m) and clauses (zg), (zh) and (zi) of sub –section 2 ].   
-Sections 102, 103, 105, 106, 107 
 
[ Except sections 94, 96,97,99, 104] 

 
[F. No. J-9/1/2020-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 



रजिस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99                                                                                                                               REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 

  
 

 

xxxGIDHxxx 
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-xअxx.G-1ID6E0x7x2x 020-220555

CG-DL-E-16072020-220555

असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण्ड  (i)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   345] िई दिल्ली,  बधुर्ार, िुलाई 15, 2020/ आषाढ़ 24, 1942  
No. 345] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY,  JULY 15, 2020/ASHADHA 24, 1942  
 

उपभोक्ता मामल,े खाद्य और सार्िव जिक जर्तरण मतं्रालय 

(उपभोक्ता मामल ेजर्भाग) 

अजधसचूिा 

िई दिल्ली, 15 िलुाई, 2020 

सा.का.जि. 448(अ).—कें द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजियम, 2019 ( 2019 का 35) की धारा 101 की  

उप-धारा (1) तथा उप-धारा (2) के खंड (क), (त), (थ), (ध), (प), (फ), (म), (य), (य घ), (य ङ) और (य ञ) द्वारा प्रित्त 
िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करत ेहुए और उपभोक्ता संरक्षण जियम, 1987 के अजधक्रमण में, िहां तक ये इि जियमों के अधीि आि े
र्ाले मामलों से संबंजधत ह,ैं  उि बातों के जसर्ाय जिन्ह ें ऐसे अजधक्रांत करत ेहुए अजधक्रमण से पहले दकया गया ह ैया करि े
का लोप दकया गया ह,ै जिम्िजलजखत जियम बिाती ह,ैं  अथावत ्:- 

1. संजक्षप्त िाम और प्रारम्भ – (1) इि जियमों का संजक्षप्त िाम उपभोक्ता संरक्षण (उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाि प्रजततोष 
आयोग) जियम, 2020 ह।ै 

(2) य े20 िुलाई, 2020  को प्ररृ्त्त होंगे। 

2. पररभाषाएं – (1) इि जियमों म,ें  िब तक दक सिंभ व की अन्यथा अपजेक्षत हो, - 

(क) ‘अजधजियम’ से उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजियम, 2019 (2019 का 35) अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) ‘अपीलकता’व  से ऐसा व्यजक्त अजभप्रेत ह ै िो राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग, िैसा भी 
मामला हो, के आिेि के जर्रूद्ध अपील करता ह;ै 

3146 GI/2020 (1) 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(ग) ‘प्राजधकृत अजभकताव’ से ऐसा व्यजक्त अजभप्रेत ह ैिो दकसी पक्ष की ओर से राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा 
जिला आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, के समक्ष कोई जिकायत, अपील अथर्ा उत्तर प्रस्ट्ततु करिे के जलए पक्ष 
द्वारा जर्जधर्त् प्राजधकृत दकया गया ह;ै 

(घ) ‘आयोग’ से जिला आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ङ) ‘उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष’ से राज्य सरकार अथर्ा िैसा भी मामला हो, कें द्रीय सरकार द्वारा कें द्रीय माल एरं् 
सेर्ा कर अजधजियम, 2017 (2017 का 12) की धारा 57 के अधीि स्ट्थाजपत उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष 
अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(च) ‘ज्ञापि’ से दकसी अपीलकता व द्वारा िायर की गई अपील का ज्ञापि अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(छ) ‘राष्ट्रीयकृत बैंक’ से बैंककारी कंपिी (उपक्रमों का अििव  और अंतरण) अजधजियम, 1970 (1970 का 5) की 
पहली अिुसूची में जर्जिर्िष्टव  तत्सस्ट्थािी िया बैंक अथर्ा बैंककारी कंपिी (उपक्रमों का अिवि और अंतरण) 
अजधजियम, 1980 (1980 का 40) की पहली अिुसूची म ें जर्जिर्िष्टव  तत्सस्ट्थािी िया बैंक अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ि) ‘प्रजतपक्ष’ से ऐसा व्यजक्त अजभप्रते ह ैिो अजधजियम के अधीि दकसी जिकायत का उत्तर ितेा ह;ै 

(झ) ‘अध्यक्ष’ से राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, का अध्यक्ष अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ञ) ‘प्रजतर्ािी’ से ऐसा व्यजक्त अजभप्रेत ह ैिो अपील ज्ञापि का उत्तर िेता ह;ै 

(ट) ‘धारा’ से अजधजियम की धारा अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ठ) ‘राज्य’ में संघ राज्य क्षेत्र सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

(2) इिम ें उपयोग दकए गए ऐसे िब्ि और र्ाकयांि, जिन्ह ें इिमें पररभाजषत िहीं दकया गया ह ैपरंत ुअजधजियम म ें
पररभाजषत दकया गया ह,ै का अथ व र्ही होगा िैसा अजधजियम में पररभाजषत दकया गया हो। 

3. राष्ट्रीय आयोग के कायदव िर्स और काय व समय – राष्ट्रीय आयोग के कायवदिर्स और कायव समय र्ही होंगे िो कें द्रीय 
सरकार के ह।ैं  

4. महुर और प्रतीक – राष्ट्रीय आयोग की आजधकाररक मुहर और प्रतीक र्हीं होंगे िैसा दक कें द्रीय सरकार द्वारा 

जर्जहत दकए िाएं। 

5. राष्ट्रीय आयोग की बठैक – राष्ट्रीय आयोग के अध्यक्ष, आर्श्यकता पड़ि ेपर, राष्ट्रीय आयोग की बैठकों का संयोिि 

करेंग,े और ये बैठकें  राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा अजधसूजचत की िाएगंी।  

6. जर्श्लषेण और परीक्षण के जलए राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा र्स्ट्त ु के अजधप्रमाणि की पद्धजत – (1) परीक्षण अथर्ा 

जर्श् लेषण के प्रयोििाथव राष्ट्रीय आयोग, जिकायतकताव को र्स्ट्तु के एक या एक से अजधक िमूिे साफ कंटेिरों, जिि 
पर उजचत रूप से स्ट्टॉपर लगाया गया हो, में उपलब्ध करािे का जििेि ि ेसकता ह।ै 

(2) ऐसी र्स्ट्तओुं के िमूि ेप्राप्त करि ेके पश् चात, राष्ट्रीय आयोग इि िमूिों को सीलबंि करेगा और कंटेिरों पर 

लेबल चस्ट्पा करेगा जिस पर जिम् िजलजखत िािकाररयों का उल्लेख होगा, अथावत:् – 

(क) उस उपयुक्त प्रयोगिाला का िाम और पता िहां िमूि े को जर्श् लेषण और परीक्षण के जलए 
भेिा िाएगा; 

(ख) राष्ट्रीय आयोग का िाम और पता; 

(ग) र्ाि संख्या; और 

(घ) राष्ट्रीय आयोग की आजधकाररक मुहर। 

(3) राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा सीलबंि िमूि ेको मान्यताप्राप्त प्रयोगिाला में भेिा िाएगा। 

(4) मान्यताप्राप्त प्रयोगिाला, सीलबंि िमूिे को प्राप्त करिे और इसकी िांच करिे के उपरांत, पतैं ालीस दििों 
अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा यथास्ट्र्ीकृत जर्स्ट्ताररत अर्जध के भीतर िोष की प्रकृजत और ररपोटव प्रस्ट्तुत करिे की 
तारीख जर्जिर्िष्टव  करते हुए राष्ट्रीय आयोग को अपिी ररपोटव अग्रेजषत करेगी। 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  3 

7. जिकायत िायर करि ेके जलए िलु्क – (1) धारा 35 की उप-धारा (1) अथर्ा धारा 47 की उप-धारा (1) के खंड 

(क) के उप-खंड (i) और (ii) अथर्ा धारा 58 की उप-धारा (1) के खंड (क) के उप-खंड (i) और (ii) के अधीि 

िायर की गई प्रत्सयेक जिकायत के साथ जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष अथर्ा राज्य आयोग के पिंीयक अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय 
आयोग के पंिीयक, िैसा भी मामला हो, के पक्ष में दकसी राष्ट्रीयकृत बैंक पर िेय रेखांदकत जडमांड ड्राफ्ट के रूप में 
अथर्ा रेखांदकत भारतीय पोस्ट्टल ऑडरव , िो उस स्ट्थाि पर िेय हो िहां जिला आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा 
राष्ट्रीय आयोग जस्ट्थत ह,ै के माध्यम से अथर्ा संबंजधत आयोग द्वारा की गई व्यर्स्ट्था के अिुसार इलेकरॉजिक मोड 
के माध्यम से िुल्क, िैसा दक िीचे िी गई सारणी में जर्जिर्िष्टव  ह,ै िमा करािा होगा।  

(2) जिला आयोग अथर्ा राज्य आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, उप-जियम (1) के अधीि उिके द्वारा प्राप्त की गई 
िुल्क की राजि को राज्य के उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष और िहां ऐसा उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष स्ट्थाजपत िहीं ह,ै राज्य 
सरकार के उपयकु्त खाते म ें िमा कराएंगे, तथा राष्ट्रीय आयोग उसके द्वारा प्राप्त की गई ऐसी राजि को कें द्रीय 
सरकार के उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष में िमा कराएगा।  

सारणी 

क्रम सं. र्स्ट्तुओं अथर्ा सेर्ाओं के प्रजतफल के रूप में भगुताि दकया िेय िलु्क की राजि 
गया मलू्य 

(1) (2) (3) 

 जिला आयोग  

1. पांच लाख रूपये तक िून्य 
2. पांच लाख रूपये से अजधक और िस लाख रूपय ेतक 200/- रूपय े
3. िस लाख रूपये से अजधक और बीस लाख रूपय ेतक 400/- रूपय े
4. बीस लाख रूपय ेसे अजधक और पचास लाख रूपय ेतक 1000/- रूपय े
5. पचास लाख रूपये से अजधक और एक करोड़ रूपय ेतक 2000/- रूपय े

 

 राज्य आयोग  

6. एक करोड़ रूपय ेसे अजधक और िो करोड़ रूपये तक 2500/- रूपय े
7. िो करोड़ रूपय ेसे अजधक और चार करोड़ रूपये तक 3000/- रूपय े
8. चार करोड़ रूपये से अजधक और छः करोड़ रूपय ेतक 4000/- रूपय े
9. छः करोड़ रूपय ेसे अजधक और आठ करोड़ रूपय ेतक 5000/- रूपय े

10. आठ करोड़ रूपय ेसे अजधक और िस करोड़ रूपये तक 6000/- रूपय े

 राष्ट्रीय आयोग  

11. िस करोड़ रूपय ेसे अजधक 7500/- रूपय े

8. इलकेरॉजिक रूप म ें जिकायत िायर करिे की पद्धजत – राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग म ें
इलेकरॉजिक रूप म ें जिकायत िायर करिे की िरुूआत उस तारीख से और र्ािों की ऐसी श्रेणी के जलए प्रभार्ी 
होगी िो समय-समय पर राष्ट्रीय आयोग के अध्यक्ष द्वारा अजधसूजचत की िाएगी। 

9. राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग की अजतररक्त िजक्तया ं– (1) राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा 
जिला आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, को दकसी व्यजक्त से जिम्नजलजखत अपेजक्षत करिे की िजक्तयां प्राप्त होंगी – 

(क) आयोग के समक्ष ऐसी बही, लखेा, िस्ट्तारे्ि अथर्ा र्स्ट्त ुप्रस्ट्तुत करिा िो उस व्यजक्त के संरक्षण अथर्ा 
जियंत्रण म ें ह ैऔर िो आयोग के समक्ष दकसी कायवर्ाही के प्रयोिि से प्रस्ट्तुत दकए िाि ेके जलए अपेजक्षत 
ह,ैं  तथा इिकी िांच दकए िाि ेऔर आयोग के दकसी ऐसे अजधकारी के पास रखे िाि ेकी अिुमजत ििेा 
जिसे इसके जलए जर्जिर्िष्टव  दकया िाएगा। 

(ख) आयोग के समक्ष दकसी कायवर्ाही के प्रयोििाथव यथाअपेजक्षत ऐसी िािकारी को खंड (क) म ें जर्जिर्िष्टव  
अजधकारी को प्रस्ट्तुत करिा। 

(2) इस अजधजियम के अधीि दकसी कायवर्ाही के िौराि, िब राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग, 
िैसा भी मामला हो, को यह जर्श्वास करिे का कोई आधार हो दक ऐसी कायवर्ाजहयों में प्रस्ट्तुत दकए िािे के जलए 



4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

अपेजक्षत दकसी बही, िस्ट्तारे्ि, र्स्ट्त ुअथर्ा कागिात को जर्िष्ट, जर्कृत, बिला, जमथ्या रूप से प्रस्ट्तुत अथर्ा 
जछपाया िा रहा ह ैअथर्ा िा सकता ह,ै तो यह जलजखत आििे के िररए दकसी अजधकारी को दकसी पररसर में 
प्ररे्ि और खोिबीि करि ेदकसी बही, कागिात, िस्ट्तारे्ि अथर्ा र्स्ट्तु की िब्ती करिे, िैसा उस कायवर्ाही के 
प्रयोििों के जलए अपेजक्षत हो, के जलए प्राजधकृत कर सकता ह।ै 

 परंतु ऐसी िब्ती दकए िािे के यथािीघ्र अथर्ा ऐसी िब्ती दकए िािे के बाि बहत्तर घंटों से अिजधक 
अर्जध के भीतर ऐसी िब्ती करिे के जलए जलजखत रूप में कारणों का उल्लेख करते हुए  ऐसी िब्ती की सूचिा 
राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, को िी िाएगी। 

(3) राष्ट्रीय आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, िब्त दकए गए िस्ट्तारे्िों अथर्ा 
र्स्ट्तुओं की िांच के उपरांत उिके प्रजतधारण अथर्ा उन्ह ें संबंजधत पक्ष को र्ाजपस दकए िाि ेके आिेि ि ेसकता 
ह।ै  

10. ऐस ेउपभोक्ताओं, जििका आसािी स ेअजभजिधारव ण िहीं दकया िा सकता, को हुई हाजि अथर्ा क्षजत के जलए िेय 
राजि को िमा करािा – (1) िब कभी जिला आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा क्रमिः धारा 49 
की उप-धारा (1) अथर्ा धारा 59 की उप-धारा (1) के अधीि इन्ह ें प्रित्त िजक्तयों का उपयोग करते हुए धारा 39 
की उप-धारा (1) के खंड (ट) के अधीि बड़ी संख्याओं म ें ऐसे उपभोक्ताओं, जििका आसािी से पता िहीं लगाया 
िा सकता, को हुई हाजि अथर्ा क्षजत के जलए प्रजतपक्ष को ऐसी राजि, िो उसके द्वारा जिधावररत की िाए, का 
भुगताि करि ेका जििेि िेत ेहुए कोई आिेि िारी दकया िाए, तो ऐसी राजि जिला आयोग और राज्य आयोग 
द्वारा राज्य सरकार द्वारा स्ट्थाजपत दकए गए उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष म ें तथा राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा कें द्रीय सरकार 
द्वारा स्ट्थाजपत दकए गए उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष म ें िमा की िाएगी। 

(2) उप जियम (1) के कें द्रीय सरकार के उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष में िमा की गई राजि को कें द्रीय माल एरं् सेर्ा 
कर जियमार्ली, 2017 के जियम 97 के अिुसार उपयोग दकया िाएगा तथा उप-जियम (1) के अधीि राज्य 
सरकार के उपभोक्ता कल्याण कोष में िमा की गई राजि को राज्य माल एरं् सेर्ा कर जियमार्ली, 2017 के 
अधीि बिाए गए जियमों के अिुसार उपयोग दकया िाएगा। 

11.    राज्य आयोग के समक्ष अपील िायर करि ेऔर सिुर्ाई की प्रदक्रया – (1) अपीलकताव अथर्ा उिके प्राजधकृत 
अजभकताव द्वारा राज्य आयोग को एक ज्ञापि व्यजक्तगत रूप से अथर्ा राज्य आयोग को जर्जधर्त सम्बोजधत पार्ती 
के साथ पंिीकृत डाक के माध्यम से प्रस्ट्तुत दकया िाएगा।  

(2) उप-जियम (1) के अधीि िायर दकया गया प्रत्सयेक ज्ञापि प्राथजमकता के तौर पर टंदकत अथर्ा पठिीय 
हस्ट्तजलजप म ें होिा चाजहए तथा दकसी तकव -जर्तकव  अथर्ा जर्र्रणात्समक तथ्यों के जबिा अपील के जर्जिष्ट िीषों, 
आधारों के अधीि संक्षेप में होिा चाजहए तथा ऐसे आधारों को क्रमर्ार रूप से क्रमांक अंदकत दकया िािा चाजहए। 

(3) प्रत्सयेक ज्ञापि के साथ जिला आयोग के आििे, जिसके जर्रूद्ध अपील की गई ह,ै की प्रमाजणत प्रजत तथा ऐसे 
िस्ट्तारे्ि िो ज्ञापि म ें उजल्लजखत अपील के आधारों को समर्थवत करि े के जलए अपेजक्षत हों, प्रस्ट्तुत दकए िाि े
चाजहए। 

(4) यदि अपील धारा 41 में यथाजर्जिर्िष्टव  समयार्जध की समाजप्त के पश्चात् प्रस्ट्ततु की िाती ह,ै तो ज्ञापि के 
साथ एक आरे्िि िो एक ऐसे िपथपत्र द्वारा समर्थवत दकया िाएं जिस पर रे् तथ्य दिए गए हों जिि पर 
अपीलकताव राज्य आयोग को संतुष्ट करिे के जलए जिभवर ह ैदक उसके पास समयार्जध के भीतर अपील को र्रीयता 
ि दिए िाि ेके पयावप्त कारण ह।ैं  

(5) अपीलकताव कायावलय प्रयोग के जलए राज्य आयोग को ज्ञापि की चार प्रजतयां प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा। 

(6) सुिर्ाई की तारीख पर अथर्ा दकसी अन्य दिि, जिसे सुिर्ाई स्ट्थजगत की िाए, पक्ष अथर्ा उिके प्राजधकृत 
अजभकताव राज्य आयोग के समक्ष उपजस्ट्थत होंगे, और िहां 

(क) अपीलकताव अथर्ा उसका प्राजधकृत अजभकताव उपजस्ट्थत होिे में असफल रहता ह,ै राज्य आयोग, 
अपि ेजर्रे्कािुसार, अपील को खाररि कर सकता ह ैअथर्ा र्ाि की जर्जिष्टता के आधार पर एकपक्षीय 
जिणवय ि ेसकता ह।ै 

(ख) प्रजतर्ािी अथर्ा उसका प्राजधकृत अजभकताव उपजस्ट्थत होिे म ें असफल रहता ह,ै राज्य आयोग 
एकपक्षीय कायवर्ाही करेगा और र्ाि की जर्जिष्टता के आधार पर जिणवय िगेा। 

 (7) अपीलकताव को ज्ञापि में उजल्लजखत ि दकए गए दकसी आधार के समथवि म,ें  राज्य आयोग की अिुमजत के 
जबिा, आग्रह िहीं करेगा अथर्ा सुिा िहीं िाएगा, ककंत ुराज्य आयोग अपील पर जिणवय ितेे समय ज्ञापि में उजल्लजखत 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  5 

अपील के अथर्ा इस जियम के अधीि राज्य आयोग की अिमुजत द्वारा जलए गए आधारों तक ही स्ट्र्यं को सीजमत िहीं 
रखेगा: 

 परंतु राज्य आयोग अपि ेजिणयव  को दकसी अन्य आधार पर िहीं छोडे़गा िब तक दक उससे प्रभाजर्त होिे र्ाल े
पक्ष को राज्य आयोग द्वारा कम-से-कम सुिे िािे का अर्सर प्रिाि ि दकया गया हो। 

 (8) राज्य आयोग द्वारा दकसी भी चरण म ें सामान्यतः दकसी भी स्ट्थगि की अिुमजत िहीं िी िाएगी, िब तक दक 
पयावप्त कारण ि ििावए गए हो और स्ट्थगि की अिुमजत के कारणों को राज्य आयोग द्वारा जलजखत रूप म ें लेखबद्ध ि कर 
जलया गया हो: 

 परंत ुराज्य आयोग सामान्य तौर पर एक से अजधक स्ट्थगि की अिुमजत िहीं िगेा और िहां तक संभर् हो यह 
सुजिजश्चत करेगा दक अपील िायर होि ेकी तारीख से िब्बे दििों की अर्जध के भीतर अपील पर जिणवय ल ेजलया िाए: 

 परंतु यह भी दक पहले परंतुक में जर्जिर्िष्टव  अर्जध के बाि जिस्ट्ताररत की िा रही अपील के मामले म,ें  राज्य 
आयोग उक्त अपील के जिस्ट्तारण के समय इसके कारणों को जलजखत रूप म ें लेखबद्ध करेगा।  

 (9) अपील के संबंध म ें राज्य आयोग के आिेि को पीठ में सजम्मजलत राज्य आयोग के सिस्ट्यों द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत 
और दििांदकत दकया िाएगा और संबंजधत पक्षों को आिेि की जिःिुल्क सूचिा िी िाएगी। 

12. राष्ट्रीय आयोग के समक्ष जिकायतों के सबंधं म ें प्रदक्रया – (1) जिकायतकताव द्वारा राष्ट्रीय आयोग म ें व्यजक्तगत रूप 
से अथर्ा उसके अजभकताव द्वारा अथर्ा उस आयोग को सम्बोजधत पंिीकृत डाक के माध्यम से जिकायत प्रस्ट्तुत की 
िाएगी, जिसमें जिम् िजलजखत जर्र्रण सजम्मजलत होंगे, अथावत् : –  

(क) जिकायतकताव का िाम, जर्र्रण और पता; 

(ख) प्रजतपक्ष अथर्ा पक्षों, िैसा भी मामला हो, िहां तक उन्ह ें जिधावररत दकया िा सके, का िाम, जर्र्रण और 
पता; 

(ग) जिकायत से संबंजधत तथ्य और रे् कब एरं् कहां उत्सपन्न हुए; 

(घ) जिकायत में लगाए गए आरोपों के समथिव  म ें िस्ट्तारे्ि; 

(ङ) जिकायतकताव द्वारा िार्ा दकया गया अितुोष। 

(2) उप-जियम (1) के अधीि की गई प्रत्सयेक जिकायत केसाथ जियम 7 म ें यथाजर्जिर्िष्टव  िलु्क िमा करािा होगा। 

(3) राष्ट्रीय आयोग, उसके समक्ष िायर दकसी जिकायत का जिस्ट्तारण करत ेसमय, उसके द्वारा आर्श्यक समझे 
िािे र्ाले आिोधिों के साथ धारा 37 और 38 के अधीि उपबंजधत प्रदक्रया और ितों का पालि करेगा। 

(4) सुिर्ाई की तारीख अथर्ा अन्य दकसी तारीख जिस पर सुिर्ाई स्ट्थजगत की िाती ह,ै पक्ष अथर्ा उिके 
प्राजधकृत अजभकताव राष्ट्रीय आयोग के समक्ष उपजस्ट्थत होंगे, और िहां 

(क) अपीलकता व अथर्ा उसका प्राजधकृत अजभकता व उपजस्ट्थत होिे म ें असफल रहता ह,ै राष्ट्रीय आयोग, 
अपि े जर्रे्कािुसार, जिकायत को चूक के जलए खाररि कर सकता ह ैअथर्ा जर्जिष्टता के आधार पर 
जिणवय ि ेसकता ह।ै 

(ख) प्रजतर्ािी अथर्ा उसका प्राजधकृत अजभकताव उपजस्ट्थत होिे में असफल रहता ह,ै राष्ट्रीय आयोग र्ाि 
की जर्जिष्टता के आधार पर एकपक्षीय जिणवय िे सकता ह।ै 

(5) राष्ट्रीय आयोग, ऐसे जिबंधिों, िो र्ह उजचत समझे, और कायवर्ाजहयों के दकसी भी चरण म,ें  जिकायत की 
सुिर्ाई को स्ट्थजगत कर सकता ह,ै ककंत ुिहां तक सम्भर् हो जिकायत पर जिम्नजलजखत अर्जध के भीतर जिणवय 
जलया िाएगा – 

(क) िहां जिकायत के संबंध में र्स्ट्तु के दकसी जर्श्लेषण अथर्ा परीक्षण की आर्श्यकता िहीं ह,ै प्रजतपक्ष द्वारा 
सूचिा प्राप्त हो िाि ेकी तारीख से तीि माह की अर्जध के भीतर; और 

(ख) यदि जिकायत के संबंध में जर्श्लषेण अथर्ा परीक्षण आर्श्यक हो तो पांच माह की अर्जध के भीतर।  

(6) उप-जियम (5) में जर्जिर्िष्टव  अर्जध के पश्चात् जिपटाई िा रही जिकायत के मामले में, राष्ट्रीय आयोग 
िेरी के कारणों को जलजखत रूप में लेखबद्ध करेगा।  
 



6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(7) यदि कायवर्ाजहयों के संचालि के पश्चात ्राष्ट्रीय आयोग जिकायत म ें सजम्मजलत दकए गए आरोपों से संतषु्ट 
ह ैतो यह प्रजतपक्ष अथर्ा पक्षों, िैसा भी मामला हो, को धारा 39 की उप-धारा (1) म ें उजल्लजखत एक अथर्ा 
अजधक कारवर्ाईयों का जििेि ितेे हुए उसे अथर्ा उन्ह ें आिेि िारी करेगा। 
 
(8) राष्ट्रीय आयोग को यह जििेि िेिे का भी अजधकार होगा दक उसके द्वारा पाररत दकए गए दकसी ऐसे 
आिेि, जिसके जलए धारा 67 के अधीि दकसी अपील को र्रीयता िहीं िी गई ह ैअथर्ा िहां उस धारा के अधीि 
राष्ट्रीय आयोग के आिेि की अजभपुजष्ट उच् चतम न्यायालय द्वारा की गई ह,ै को इसकी रे्बसाइट पर अथर्ा दकसी 
अन्य माध्यम से प्रकाजित दकया िाएगा तथा ऐसे प्रकािि के जलए राष्ट्रीय आयोग अथर्ा दकसी अन्य माध्यम के 
जर्रूद्ध कोई जर्जधक कारवर्ाई िायी िहीं होगी।  
 
(9) राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग उिके समक्ष िायर जिकायत के संबंध म ें ऐसे आिोधिों, िो आर्श्यक 
हो, सजहत इस जियम म ें जर्जिर्िष्टव  प्रदक्रया का पालि करेगा। 

13.  राष्ट्रीय आयोग के समक्ष अपील ें – िहां धारा 51 के अधीि कोई अपील िायर की िाती ह,ै अपीलकताव द्वारा िमा 
की िािे र्ाली राजि, िो दक उक्त धारा के िसूरे परंतुक म ें जर्जिर्िष्टव  ह,ै पंिीयक, राष्ट्रीय आयोग के पक्ष में दकसी 
राष्ट्रीयकृत बैंक के रेखांदकत जडमांड ड्राफ्ट, िो िई दिल्ली म ें िये होगा, के रूप म ें प्रेजषत की िाएगी।  

14. राष्ट्रीय आयोग के समक्ष अपील िायर करि ेऔर सिुर्ाई की प्रदक्रया – (1) अपीलकताव अथर्ा उसके प्राजधकृत 
अजभकताव द्वारा राष्ट्रीय आयोग में व्यजक्तगत रूप से अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय आयोग को संबोजधत पंिीकृत डाक के माध्यम से 
एक ज्ञापि प्रस्ट्ततु दकया िाएगा। 

(2) उप-जियम (1) के अधीि िायर दकया गया प्रत्सयेक ज्ञापि प्राथजमकता के तौर पर टंदकत अथर्ा पठिीय 
हस्ट्तजलजप म ें होिा चाजहए तथा दकसी तकव -जर्तकव  अथर्ा जर्र्रणात्समक तथ्यों के जबिा अपील के जर्जिष्ट िीषों, 
आधारों के अधीि संक्षेप में होिा चाजहए तथा ऐसे आधारों को क्रमर्ार रूप से क्रमांक अंदकत दकया िािा चाजहए। 

(3) ज्ञापि के साथ जियम, 16 में यथाजर्जिर्िष्टव  रेखांदकत जडमांड ड्राफ्ट, राज्य आयोग के आिेि, जिसके जर्रूद्ध 
अपील की गई ह,ै की प्रमाजणत प्रजत तथा ऐसे िस्ट्तारे्ि िो ज्ञापि म ें उजल्लजखत अपील के आधारों को समर्थवत 
करिे के जलए अपेजक्षत हों, प्रस्ट्ततु दकए िाि ेचाजहए। 

(4) यदि अपील धारा 51 में यथाजर्जिर्िष्टव  समयार्जध की समाजप्त के पश्चात् प्रस्ट्ततु की िाती ह,ै तो ज्ञापि के 
साथ एक आरे्िि िो एक ऐसे िपथपत्र द्वारा समर्थवत दकया िाएं जिस पर रे् तथ्य दिए गए हों जिि पर 
अपीलकताव राष्ट्रीय आयोग को संतुष्ट करि े के जलए जिभवर ह ै दक उसके पास समयार्जध के भीतर अपील को 
र्रीयता ि दिए िािे के पयावप्त कारण ह।ैं  

(5) अपीलकताव कायावलय प्रयोििों के जलए राष्ट्रीय आयोग को ज्ञापि की चार प्रजतयां प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा। 

(6) सुिर्ाई की तारीख पर अथर्ा दकसी अन्य दिि, जिसे सुिर्ाई स्ट्थजगत की िाए, पक्ष अथर्ा उिके प्राजधकृत 
अजभकताव राष्ट्रीय आयोग के समक्ष उपजस्ट्थत होंगे, और िहां 

(क) अपीलकता व अथर्ा उसका प्राजधकृत अजभकता व उपजस्ट्थत होिे म ें असफल रहता ह,ै राष्ट्रीय आयोग, 
अपि ेजर्रे्कािुसार, अपील को खाररि कर सकता ह ैअथर्ा र्ाि की जर्जिष्टता के आधार पर एकपक्षीय 
जिणवय ि ेसकता ह।ै 

(ख) प्रजतर्ािी अथर्ा उसका प्राजधकृत अजभकताव उपजस्ट्थत होिे में असफल रहता ह,ै राष्ट्रीय आयोग 
एकपक्षीय कायवर्ाही करेगा और र्ाि की जर्जिष्टता के आधार पर जिणवय िगेा। 

 (7) अपीलकताव को ज्ञापि में उजल्लजखत ि दकए गए दकसी आधार के समथवि म,ें  राष्ट्रीय आयोग की अिुमजत के 
जबिा, आग्रह िहीं करेगा अथर्ा सुिा िहीं िाएगा, ककंतु राष्ट्रीय आयोग अपील पर जिणवय ितेे समय ज्ञापि म ें उजल्लजखत 
अपील के अथर्ा इस जियम के अधीि राष्ट्रीय आयोग की अिमुजत द्वारा जलए गए आधारों तक ही स्ट्र्यं को सीजमत िहीं 
रखेगा: 

 परंत ुराष्ट्रीय आयोग अपिे जिणयव  को दकसी अन्य आधार पर िहीं छोडे़गा िब तक दक उससे प्रभाजर्त होिे र्ाल े
पक्ष को राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा कम-से-कम सुिे िािे का अर्सर प्रिाि ि दकया गया हो। 

 (8) राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा दकसी भी चरण में सामान्यतः दकसी भी स्ट्थगि की अिुमजत िहीं िी िाएगी, िब तक दक 
पयावप्त कारण ि ििावए गए हो और स्ट्थगि की अिुमजत के कारणों को राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा जलजखत रूप म ें लेखबद्ध ि कर 
जलया गया हो: 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  7 

 परंतु राष्ट्रीय आयोग स्ट्र्-प्रेरणा से अपील की सुिर्ाई को ऐसे जिबंधिों के आधार पर िो र्ह उजचत समझें और 
कायवर्ाही के दकसी भी चरण में स्ट्थजगत कर सकता ह,ै जिसके कारण जलजखत रूप म ें लेखबद्ध दकए िाएंग,े ककंत ुराष्ट्रीय 
आयोग यह यथासंभर् सुजिश् चत करेगा दक अपील िायर होिे की तारीख से िब्बे दििों की अर्जध के भीतर अपील पर 
जिणवय ले जलया िाए: 

 परंत ुयह भी दक पहल ेपरंतुक में जर्जिर्िष्टव  अर्जध के बाि जिस्ट्ताररत की िा रही अपील के मामले म,ें  राष्ट्रीय 
आयोग उक्त अपील के जिस्ट्तारण के समय इसके कारणों को जलजखत रूप म ें लेखबद्ध करेगा।  

15. राष्ट्रीय आयोग म ें सिस्ट्यों की सखं्या – राष्ट्रीय आयोग में एक अध्यक्ष तथा न्यूितम चार सिस्ट्य और अजधकतम 
ग्यारह सिस्ट्य, जििम ें से एक मजहला सिस्ट्य होगी, सजम्मजलत होंगे। 

16. राष्ट्रीय आयोग की बठैक और आिेिों पर हस्ट्ताक्षर करिा – (1) राष्ट्रीय आयोग की प्रत्सयेक कायवर्ाही का संचालि 
राष्ट्रीय आयोग के अध्यक्ष द्वारा एक अथर्ा एक से अजधक सिस्ट्यों, िैसा र्ह उजचत समझे, को सजम्मजलत करते हुए 
गरठत की गई पीठ के सद्सस्ट्यों द्वारा दकया िाएगा। 

(2) राष्ट्रीय आयोग द्वारा दिए गए प्रत्सयेक आिेि पर कायवर्ाही का संचालि करि ेर्ाले सिस्ट्यों द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए 
िाएंगे और यदि पीठ के सिस्ट्यों की राय म ें कोई जभन्नता ह,ै सिस्ट्यों का बहुमत राष्ट्रीय आयोग का आिेि होगा।  

17. उच्चतम न्यायालय के समक्ष िायर की गई अपीलों के जलए िलु्क िमा करि ेकी पद्धजत – िब धारा 67 के अधीि 
उच् चतम न्यायालय के समक्ष कोई अपील िायर की िाती ह,ै अपीलकताव द्वारा िमा दकया िािे र्ाला िुल्क, िो 
उस धारा के िसूरे परंतुक म ें जर्जिर्िष्टव  ह,ै पंिीयक, उच् चतम न्यायालय के पक्ष म ें दकसी राष्ट्रीयकृत बैंक के 
रेखांदकत जडमांड ड्राफ्ट के रूप में प्रेजषत दकया िाएगा, िो िई दिल्ली म ें िेय होगा। 

18. राज्य आयोग द्वारा िािकारी प्रस्ट्ततु करिा – राज्य आयोग इि जियमों की अिुसूची I में यथाजर्जिर्िष्टव  प्रपत्र म ें
जतमाही आधार पर कें द्रीय सरकार को िािकारी प्रस्ट्तुत करेंगे। 

अिसुचूी  I 

[जियम 18] 

कायान्व र्यि की र्तमव ाि जस्ट्थजत 

(जतमाही काय व जिष्पािि ररपोटव) 

उपभोक्ता आयोगों का कायकव रण/उपभोक्ता सरंक्षण के उपाय 

राज्य का िाम: 

1.  राज्य आयोग और जिला मचंों की स्ट्थापिा: 

I राज्य/संघ राज्य क्षेत्र में जिलों की कुल संख्या  

II राज्य में जिला आयोगों की संख्या  

 (क) कुल स्ट्थापिा:  

 (ख) कायविील:  

 (ग) गैर-कायविील:  

 (घ) उि जिलों के िाम जििमें जिला आयोग की स्ट्थापिा दकया िािा  

बाकी ह:ै 

 (ङ) उि जिलों की संख्या जििम ें जिला आयोग की स्ट्थापिा दकया िािा  

बाकी ह:ै 

 (च) उि जिलों की संख्या जििमें एक से जिले का िाम जिला आयोगों की संख्या 

 अजधक जिला आयोग स्ट्थाजपत दकए गए ह ैं   

III कया राज्य आयोग कायविील ह ै  हां िहीं 

IV स्ट्र्ीकृत पि एरं् ररजक्तयों की संख्या राज्य आयोग जिला आयोग 

 स्ट्र्ीकृत ररक्त पि स्ट्र्ीकृत पि ररक्त पि 

पि 

 (क) अध्यक्ष   

 (ख) सिस्ट्य   



8  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

 (ग) ररक्त पिों के कारण तथा उन्हें भरिे के  

जलए की गई कारवर्ाई (पृथक रूप से संलग्न 

दकया िाए) 

2. राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग का काय व जिष्पािि 

I (क) स्ट्थापिा काल से िायर दकए गए कुल राज्य आयोग  जिला आयोग 

मामले   

(ख) जिपटाए गए मामल े   

(ग) जिधावररत समय माििडंों के भीतर   

जिपटाए गए मामल े

(घ) लोक अिालत पद्धजत के माध्यम से   

जिपटाए गए मामलों की संख्या 

    

II लंजबत मामलों का जर्स्ट्तृत जर्र्रण (मामलों राज्य आयोग जिला आयोग 

की संख्या का उल्लेख करें) 

(क) 3 माह से अजधक और 1 र्षव तक   

(ख) 1 र्षव से अजधक और 2 र्षव तक   

(ग) 2 र्षव से अजधक और 5 र्ष व तक   

(घ) 5 र्ष व से अजधक   

III समय माििंडों के भीतर की अर्जध म ें राज्य आयोग जिला आयोग 

जिपटाए गए मामल े (संख्या का उल्लेख 

करें) 

 (क) 15 माचव 2002 के बाि प्राप्त मामले   

 (ख) उपरोक्त (क) में से समय माििंडों के   

भीतर की अर्जध में जिपटाए गए मामल े

(संख्या और %) 

3. कािफोिटे पररयोििा का कायान्व र्यि 

I कम््यूटर हाडवरे्यर/सॉफ्टरे्यर राज्य आयोग जिला आयोग (संख्या) 

(क) प्राप्त दकए गए हां िहीं  

(ख) संस्ट्थाजपत दकए गए हां  िहीं  

(ग) कायविील हां िहीं  

II कम््यूटरों के माध्यम से दकए िा रह े राज्य आयोग जिला आयोग (संख्या) 

कायवकलाप 

 (क) कया मामला जिगरािी प्रणाली हां िहीं  

संस्ट्थाजपत और कायविाली ह;ै 

 (ख) कया मामल ेका र्ास्ट्तजर्क समय डाटा हां  िहीं  

प्रजर्ष्ट दकया गया ह?ै 

 (ग) कया र्ाि सूची और जिणवय को हां िहीं  

रे्बसाइट पर डाला िा रहा ह?ै 

4 प्रजिक्षण 

(क) भारतीय लोक प्रिासि संस्ट्थाि म ें प्रजिक्षण योििा के अब तक जतमाही के िौराि 

सिस्ट्यों/अध्यक्ष का प्रजिक्षण अिुसार में र्षव म ें प्रजिजक्षत दकए 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  9 

प्रजिजक्षत दकए िाि े गए 

र्ाले 

   

(ख) बीआईएस प्रजिक्षण संस्ट्थाि म ें राज्य/जिला    

स्ट्तरीय अजधकाररयों का प्रजिक्षण 

(ग) कािफोिेट के अधीि प्रजिक्षण    

 (क) अध्यक्ष तथा सिस्ट्य    

 (ख) अन्य स्ट्टॉफ    

(घ) अन्य कोई प्रजिक्षण    

[फा. सं. िे-10/6/2018-सीपीयू] 

 अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर् 
 

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 

(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15 July, 2020 

G.S.R. 448(E).— In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and clauses (a), (p), (q), 
(s), (u), (v), (y), (z), (zd), (ze), and (zj) of sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019 (35 of 2019) and in supersession of the Consumer Protection Rules, 1987 in so far as they relate to 
matters covered under these rules, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such 
supersession, the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 

 
1. Short title and commencement.— (1) These rules may be called the Consumer Protection 
(Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions) Rules, 2020. 
 

th
(2)  They shall come into force on the 20  day of July,2020. 
 
2. Definitions. —(1) ln these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,— 

 
(a) 'Act' means the Consumer Protection Act 2019 (35 of 2019); 
(b) 'appellant' means a person who makes an appeal against the order of the National 

Commission, the State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may 
be; 

(c) 'authorised agent' means a person duly authorised by a party to present any 
complaint, appeal or reply on behalf of such party before the National 
Commission, the State Commission, or the District Commission, as the case may 
be; 

(d) ‘Commission’ means the District Commission, the State Commission, or the 
National Commission, as the case may be; 

(e) ‘Consumer Welfare Fund’ means the Consumer Welfare Fund established by a 
State Government or, as the case may be, by the  Central Government under 
section 57 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017) ; 

(f) 'memorandum' means any memorandum of appeal filed by the appellant; 
(g) 'nationalised bank' means a corresponding new bank specified in the First 

Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or a corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule 



10  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 
(40 of 1980);  

(h) ‘opposite party' means a person who answers a complaint under the Act; 
(i) 'President' means the President of the National Commission, the State Commission  

or the District Commission, as the case may be; 
(j) 'respondent' means the person who answers any memorandum of appeal; 
(k) “section” means a section of the Act; 
(l) 'State' includes a Union territory; 

 
(2) The words and expressions used herein, but not defined and defined in the Act shall have the 
meaning assigned to them in the Act. 

 
3. Working days and office hours of National Commission. — The working days and office hours 

of the National Commission shall be the same as that of the Central Government. 
 

4. Seal and emblem. — The official seal and emblem of the National Commission shall be such as 
the Central Government may specify. 

 
5. Sitting of National Commission. — The President of the National Commission shall convene 

sittings of the National Commission as and when it may be necessary, and such sittings shall be 
notified by the National Commission.  

 
6. Manner of authentication of goods by  National Commission for analysis and testing.-(1)The 

National Commission may direct the complainant to provide one or more than one sample of the 
goods in clean containers with stopper properly fixed on them for the purposes of testing or 
analysis.  

(2)  On receiving the samples of such goods, the National Commission shall seal it and fix labels 
on the containers carrying the following information, namely:-  

 
(a) the name and address of the appropriate laboratory to whom sample shall be sent 

for analysis and test; 
(b) the name and address of the National Commission;  
(c) the case number; and  
(d) the official seal of the National Commission. 
 

(3) The sealed sample shall be sent to the recognised laboratory by the National Commission. 
 
(4) The recognized laboratory shall, after receiving sealed sample and examining it, shall forward 
its report to the National Commission within forty-five days or within such extended time as may 
be granted by the National Commission, specifying the nature of the defect and date of submission 
of report. 
 

7. Fee for making complaints. – (1) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) of section 35 or 
under sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 47 or under sub-clauses (i) 
and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58 shall be accompanied by a fee, as specified in 
the table given below, in the form of crossed Demand Draft drawn on a nationalised bank or 
through a crossed Indian Postal Order in favour of the President of the District Commission or the 
Registrar of the State Commission or the Registrar of the National Commission, as the case may 
be, and payable at the respective place where the District Commission, State Commission or the 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  11 

National Commission is situated, or through electronic mode as per arrangement made by the 
Commission concerned. 
 
(2) The District Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, shall credit the amount 
of fee received by it under sub-rule (1) to the Consumer Welfare Fund of the State and where such 
Consumer Welfare Fund is not established, into the appropriate account of the State Government, 
and the National Commission shall credit such amount of fee received by it to the Consumer 
Welfare Fund of the Central Government.  

Table 
Sl. Amount of fee 

Value of goods or services paid as consideration 
No. payable 
(1) (2) (3) 
  District Commission   
(1) Upto rupees five lakh Nil 
(2) Above rupees five lakh and upto rupees ten lakhs Rs.200 
(3) Above rupees ten lakh and upto rupees twenty lakhs Rs 400  
(4) Above rupees twenty lakh and upto rupees fifty lakh rupees Rs.1000 
(5) Above rupees fifty lakh and upto rupees one crore Rs.2000 
  State Commission   
(6) Above rupees one crore and upto rupees two crore Rs.2500 
(7) Above rupees two crore and upto rupees four crore Rs.3000 
(8)  Above rupees four crore and upto rupees six crore Rs.4000 
(9) Above rupees six crore and upto rupees eight crore Rs.5000 
(10) Above rupees eight crore and upto rupees ten crore Rs.6000 
 National Commission  
(11) Above rupees ten crore Rs.7500 

 
8.  Manner of filing complaints electronically. —The electronic filing of complaints in National Commission, State 
Commission and District Commission shall be effective from such date and for such category of cases as may be 
notified by the President of the National Commission from time to time. 

 
9.  Additional powers of National Commission, State Commission and District Commission: --(1) The National 
Commission, the State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall have power to require any 
person, — 

 
(a) to produce before it such book, account, document or commodity which is in the custody or under 

the control of such person, if it is required for the purposes of  any proceedings before it, and 
allow the same to be examined  and kept by such officer of the Commission as it may specify in 
this behalf;  

 
(b)  to furnish to the officer specified in clause(a), such information as may be required for the purposes 

of any proceedings before it. 
 

(2) Where during any proceedings under this Act, the National Commission, the State Commission or the District 
Commission, as the case may be, has any ground to believe that any book, paper, commodity or document which may 
be required to be produced in such proceedings, are being or may be, destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or 
secreted, it may, by written order, authorise any officer to exercise the power of entry and search of any premises, and 
seizure of any book, paper, document or commodity as may be required for the purposes of such proceeding.  
 

Provided that such seizure shall be communicated to the National Commission, the State Commission or the 
District Commission, as the case may be, as soon as it is made or within a period not exceeding seventy-two hours of 
making such seizure after specifying the reasons in writing for making such seizure. 
 
(3) The National Commission, the State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may be, on examination 
of such seized documents or commodities may order the retention thereof or may return it to the party concerned. 
  
10. Credit of amount payable for loss or injury suffered by consumers who are not identifiable 
conveniently. –(1)Where an order is passed under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 39 by the District 



12  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

Commission, or the  State Commission, or the National Commission, in the exercise of its  powers vested under sub-
section (1) of section 49 respectively or sub-section (1) of section 59, directing the opposite party to pay such amount 
as may be determined by it on account of loss or injury suffered by a large number of consumers, who are not 
identifiable conveniently, such sum shall be credited by the District Commission and the  State Commission in the 
Consumer Welfare Fund established by the State Government, and  by the National Commission  in  the  Consumer 
Welfare Fund established by the Central  Government. 
 
(2)    The amount credited to the Consumer Welfare Fund of the Central Government under sub-rule (1) shall be 
utilised in accordance with rule 97 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017 and the amount credited to the 
Consumer Welfare Fund of the State Government under sub-rule (1) shall be utilised in accordance with the rules 
framed under the State Goods and Service Tax Act, 2017. 
 

11.  Procedure for filing and hearing of appeal before State Commission.- (1) A Memorandum shall be presented 
by the appellant or his authorized agent to the State Commission in person or sent by a registered post with 
acknowledgment due addressed to the State Commission. 
 
(2) Every memorandum filed under sub-rule (1) shall preferably be typed, or be in legible handwriting, and shall set 
forth concisely under distinct heads, the grounds of appeal without any argument or narrative and such grounds shall 
be numbered consecutively.  
 
(3) Each memorandum shall be accompanied by the certified copy of the order of the District Commission appealed 
against and such of the documents, as may be required to support grounds of appeal mentioned in the memorandum. 
  
(4) When the appeal is presented after the expiry of the period of limitation as specified in section 41, the 
memorandum shall be accompanied by an application supported by an affidavit setting forth the facts on which 
appellant relies upon to satisfy the State Commission that he has sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the period of limitation. 
  
(5) The appellant shall submit four copies of the memorandum to the State Commission for official purposes. 
  
(6) On the date of hearing or any other day to which hearing may be adjourned, the parties or their authorised agents 
shall appear before the State Commission, and where 
 

(a) the appellant or his authorised agent fails to appear, State Commission may, in its 
discretion, either dismiss the appeal or decide it ex-parte on the merits of the case;  
 
(b) the respondent or his authorised agent fails to appear, the State Commission shall proceed 
ex-parte and decide the appeal on the merits of the case. 

  
(7) The appellant shall not, except by the leave of the State Commission, urge or be heard in support of any ground of 
appeal not set forth in the memorandum, but the State Commission in deciding the appeal, need not confine itself to 
the grounds of appeal set forth in the memorandum or taken by leave of the State Commission under this rule: 
  

Provided that the State Commission shall not rest its decision on any other grounds unless the party who may 
be affected thereby, has been given, at least the opportunity of being heard by the State Commission. 
  
(8) No adjournment shall ordinarily be granted at any stage by the State Commission, unless sufficient cause is shown 
and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by the State Commission: 
 

Provided that the State Commission shall not ordinarily grant more than one adjournment and shall ensure, 
as far as possible, that the appeal is decided within ninety days from the date of admission: 

Provided further that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period specified in the first proviso, 
the State Commission shall record in writing the reasons for the same at the time of disposal of the said appeal. 
 
(9) The order of the State Commission on appeal shall be signed and dated by the members of the State Commission 
constituting the Bench and shall be communicated to the parties concerned free of cost.  
 
12.   Procedure in respect of complaints before National Commission. —(1) A complaint shall be presented to the 
National Commission by the complainant in person or by his agent, or  be sent by a registered post, addressed to that 
Commission, containing the following particulars, namely:- 

(a) the name, description and the address of the complainant; 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  13 

(b) the name, description and address of the opposite party or parties, as the case may be, so 
far as they can be ascertained; 

(c) the facts relating to the complaint and when and where it arose; 
(d) the documents in support of the allegations contained in the complaint; 
(e) the relief which the complainant claims. 

 
(2) Every complaint under sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied by a fee as specified in rule 7. 
 
(3) The National Commission shall, while disposing of any complaint before it, follow the procedure and 

conditions provided under sections 37 and 38, with such modifications as may be considered necessary 
by it.  

 
(4) On the date of hearing or any other date to which hearing may be adjourned, the parties or their 

authorised agents shall appear before the National Commission, and where- 
 

(a) the appellant or his authorised agent fails to appear, the National Commission may, in its 
discretion, either dismiss the complaint for default or decide it on merits;  

 
(b) the respondent or his authorised agent fails to appear, the National Commission may 

decide the complaint ex-parte on the merits of the case.  
 

(5) The National Commission may, on such terms as it deems fit and at any stage of the proceedings, 
adjourn the hearing of the complaint, but the complaint shall be decided as far as possible within a 
period of- 

 
(a) three months from the date of notice received by the opposite party where such complaint 

does not require any analysis or testing of commodities; and  
 

(b) five months if such complaint requires analysis or testing. 
 

(6)  In the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period specified in sub-rule (5), the National 
Commission shall record in writing, the reasons for such delay.  

 
(7) If after conducting the proceedings, the National Commission is satisfied with the allegations contained 

in the complaint, it shall issue order to the opposite party or parties, as the case may be, directing him or 
them to take one or more of the actions mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 39. 

 
(8) The National Commission shall also have the power to direct that any order passed by it, where no 

appeal has been preferred under section 67 or where the order of the National Commission has been 
affirmed by the Supreme Court under that section, be published on its website or through any other 
media and no legal proceedings shall lie against the National Commission or any media for such 
publication. 

 
(9) The State Commission and the District Commission shall follow the procedure specified in this rule, 

with such modifications as may be necessary, in respect of the complaint before them. 
  

13.   Appeals before National Commission. – Where an appeal is filed under section 51, the amount to be deposited 
by the appellant as provided in the second proviso to the said section shall be remitted in the form of a crossed 
Demand Draft drawn on a nationalised bank in favour of the Registrar, National Commission, payable at New Delhi.  

 
14.  Procedure for filing and hearing of appeal before National Commission-(1)     A Memorandum shall be 
presented by the appellant or his authorised agent to the National Commission in person or sent by registered post 
addressed to the National Commission. 

 
(2) Every memorandum filed under sub-rule (1) shall preferably be typed, or be in legible handwriting, and shall 

set forth concisely under distinct heads, the grounds of appeal without any argument or narrative and such 
grounds shall be numbered consecutively. 

 
(3) The memorandum shall be accompanied by a crossed Demand Draft as  specified in rule 16, a certified copy 

of the order of the State Commission  appealed against and such of the documents as may be required 
to support grounds of appeal mentioned in the memorandum. 



14  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

 

(4) When the appeal is presented after the expiry of the period of limitation as specified in section 51, the 
memorandum shall be accompanied by an application supported by an affidavit setting forth the facts on 
which the appellant relies upon to satisfy the National Commission that he has sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within the period of limitation. 

(5) The appellant shall submit four copies of the memorandum to the National Commission for official purposes.  

(6) On the date of hearing or on any other day to which hearing may be adjourned, the parties or their authorised 
agents shall appear before the National Commission, and where- 

  

(a) the appellant or his authorised agent fails to appear, the National Commission may, in its 
discretion, either dismiss the appeal or decide it ex-parte on the merits of the case;  

(b) the respondent or his authorised agent fails to appear, the National Commission shall 
proceed ex-parte and shall decide the appeal on the merits of the case.  

 (7) The appellant shall not, except by the leave of the National Commission, urge or be heard in support of any 
ground of appeal not set forth in the memorandum but the National Commission, in deciding the appeal, may not be 
confined to the grounds of appeal set forth in the memorandum or taken by leave of the National Commission under 
this rule: 

Provided that the National Commission shall not rest its decision on any other grounds unless the party who 
may be affected thereby, has been given, at least the opportunity of being heard by the National Commission.  

(8) No adjournment shall ordinarily be granted at any stage by the National Commission, unless sufficient cause 
is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by the National 
Commission: 

Provided that the National Commission may also adjourn the hearing of the appeal suo motu, on 
such terms as it may think fit and at any stage of the proceedings for reasons to be recorded in writing, but 
shall ensure, as far as possible, that the appeal is decided within ninety days from the date of its admission: 

Provided further that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period specified in the 
first proviso, the National Commission shall record in writing the reasons of the same at the time of disposal 
of the said appeal.  

15.    Number of Members in National Commission.-The National Commission shall consist of a President and not 
less than four members and not more than eleven members, of whom at least one member shall be a woman. 

16.     Sitting of National Commission and signing of orders. – (1) Every proceeding of the National Commission 
shall be conducted by members of a Bench constituted by the President of the National Commission with one or more 
members as he may deem fit. 

(2) Every order made by the National Commission shall be signed by the members who conducted the 
proceeding and if there is any difference of opinion among the members of the Bench, the opinion of the 
majority shall be the order of the National Commission. 

17.    Manner of depositing amount in appeals before Supreme Court. — Where an appeal is filed before the 
Supreme Court under section 67, the amount to be deposited by the appellant as provided in the second proviso to that 
section shall be remitted in the form of a crossed Demand Draft drawn on a nationalised bank in favour of the 
Registrar, Supreme Court, payable at New Delhi.  

18. Furnishing of information by State Commission. – The State Commissions shall furnish information to the 
Central Government on a quarterly basis in the form as specified in Schedule I to these rules. 

SCHEDULE-I 

[Rule 18] 

Present position of Implementation 

(Quarterly Performance Report) 

Working of Consumer Commissions/Consumer Protection Measures 

Name of State: 

1. Establishment of State Commissions and  District Fora : 

I Total number of Districts in State/Union Territory   

II Number of District Commissions  in the State  



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  15 

 (a) Total Setup :  

 (b) Functional :  

 (c) Non Functional :  

 (d) Name of District where District Commission yet to be set up :  

 (e) Number of District where District Commission yet to be  set up  

  District Name No of District   

(f) Number of District where more than one District Commission 

 Commission has been set up   

 

 

III Whether State Commission functional   Yes       No 

  State Commission District Commission 

IV Strength and vacancies 
Sanctioned Vacancies Sanctioned Vacancies 

Strength Strength 

 (a) President   

 (b) Members   

 (c) Reason for Vacancies and Action taken to fill up  
the same (to be enclosed separately) 

2. Performance of State Commission and District   
Commission 

I (a) Total cases filed  since inception State Commission District Commission 

   

(b) Cases disposed of   

(c) Cases disposed of within prescribed time norms   

(d) Number of cases disposed of by Lok Adalat   
method 

    

   II      D e t a i led Break up of cases pending  State Commission District Commission 

 (give number of cases) 

 (a) Over 3 months up to 1 year   

(b) Over 1 year up to 2 years   

(c)  Over 2 years up-to 5 years   

(d) Over 5 years   

III Cases disposed of within time norms (give number) State Commission District  Commission 

  

(a) Cases  received after 15 March ‘02   

 

(b) Cases disposed of within time norms out of (a)   
above (Number and %)                                            

3. Implementation of Confonet Project 

 Computer Hardware/Software has State Commission District Commission 

 (Numbers) 

I (a) been received Yes No  

(b) been installed Yes No  



16  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(c) been functional Yes No  

 Activities being done through computers  State Commission District Commission 

 (Numbers) 

II (a) Is Case Monitoring System Installed & Yes No  
Operational; 

(b) Has the live case data been entered? Yes No  

(c) Whether Cause list and  judgement being posted Yes No  
on the  website  

4 Training 

  To be trained in the  year Trained so During 

(a) Training of Members/President in Indian Institute of as per training  plan far the 

Public Administration  quarter 

   

(b) Training of State/District level Officers in BIS    
Training Institute 

 Training under Confonet    

(c) (a) President and Members    

(b) Other Staff    

(d) Any other Training    

 
[F.No.J-10/6/2018-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy  

 

अजधसचूिा 

िई दिल्ली, 15 िलुाई, 2020 

सा. का.आ. 449(अ).—कें द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजियम, 2019 ( 2019 का 35) की धारा 101 की 

उप-धारा (1) तथा उप-धारा (2) के खंड (ख) और (ग) द्वारा प्रित्त िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करते हुए, जिम् िजलजखत जियम 
बिाती ह,ैं  अथावत:्- 

1. संजक्षप्त िाम और प्रारम्भ – (1) इि जियमों का संजक्षप्त िाम उपभोक्ता संरक्षण (साधारण) जियम, 2020  ह।ै 

(2) य े  20 िुलाई, 2020   को प्ररृ्त्त होंगे। 

2. पररभाषाएं – (1) इि जियमों में, िब तक दक संिभव की अन्यथा अपेजक्षत हो, - 

(क) ‘अजधजियम’ से उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजियम, 2019 (2019 का 35) अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) ‘लोक उपयोगी सेर्ाएं’ से  

(i) हर्ाई, सड़क अथर्ा िल माध्यम से याजत्रयों अथर्ा माल की ढुलाई के जलए पररर्हि सेर्ा; अथर्ा 

(ii) डाक, टेलीग्राफ, टेलीफोि अथर्ा ब्रॉडबैंड सेर्ा; अथर्ा 

(iii) दकसी स्ट्थापि द्वारा ििता को जर्दु्यत, प्रकाि अथर्ा िल अथर्ा ईंधि अथर्ा प्राकृजतक गैस की आपूर्त;व  
अथर्ा 

(iv) बीमा सेर्ा; और 

(v) दकसी प्रमुख पत्ति अथर्ा डॉक के कायवकरण म ें अथर्ा के संबंध में सेर्ा; 

अजभप्रेत ह।ै 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  17 

3. स्ट्थाजपत होि ेर्ाली लोक उपयोगी सरे्ाएं – लोक उपयोगी सेर्ाएं धारा 2 के खंड (19) के प्रयोििों के जलए 
स्ट्थाजपत होगी। 

4. कजतपय कायकव लापों को अिजुचत व्यापार व्यर्हार स ेछूट दिया िािा – प्रत्सयक्ष या अप्रत्सयक्ष रूप से दकसी उत्सपाि 

की जबक्री, उपयोग अथर्ा आपूर्तव या दकसी व् यर्साय जहत को बढ़ार्ा िेि े के जलए दकए गए जिम्िजलजखत 

कायवकलापों की अिुमजत को अिुजचत व्यापार व्यर्हार के िायरे से छूट प्राप्त होगी, अथावत ्:– 

(क) लॉटरी (जर्जियमि) अजधजियम, 1998 (1998 का 17) के अधीि अिजु्ञात लॉटररयां; और 

(ख) सार्विजिक दू्यत अजधजियम, 1867 (1867 का 3) के अधीि गैर-जिजषद्ध संयोग अथर्ा कौिल के खेलों, िो 
दू्यतक्रीड़ा िहीं ह ैं और जििम ें सफलता कौिल की पयावप्त मात्रा पर जिभरव  करती ह ैि दक संयोग पर।  

5.  बचे ेगए माल अथर्ा प्रिाि की गई सरे्ाओं के जलए बीिक अथर्ा जबल अथर्ा िकिी रसीि अथर्ा रसीि िारी 
करि ेकी पद्धजत – (1) दकसी जर्के्रता द्वारा बेचे गए माल अथर्ा प्रिाि की गई सेर्ाओं के जलए िारी दकए गए 

बीिक, जबल, िकिी रसीि अथर्ा रसीि में कम-से-कम जिम् िजलजखत जर्र्रण सजम्मजलत होंगे, अथावत् :– 

(क) जर्के्रता का िाम और पता; 

(ख) प्रत्सयेक जर्त्तीय र्षव के जलए जर्जिष्ट, क्रमागत क्रम संख्या जिसमें अंकों की संख्या सोलह से अजधक ि हो, िो 
एक अथर्ा बहु श्रृंखला में हो, जििमें अक्षर अथर्ा संख्या अथर्ा जर्जिष्ट अंक (हाइफेि अथर्ा डैि, और स्ट्लैि 
क्रमिः ‘-’ और ‘/’ के रूप में प्रजतरूजपत) सजम्मजलत हों और उिका कोई अन्य संयोिि सजम्मजलत हो; 

(ग) इसे िारी करि ेकी तारीख;   

(घ) उपभोक्ता का िाम; 

(ङ) माल अथर्ा सेर्ा का जर्र्रण; 

(च) मात्रा, माल के मामल ेमें; 

(छ) जिपपंग का पता, िहां लागू हो; 

(ि) कर योग्य मलू्य और छूट; 

(झ) कर की िर; 

(ञ) जर्के्रता अथर्ा उसके दकसी प्राजधकृत प्रजतजिजध के हस्ट्ताक्षर; 

(ट) ग्राहक सेर्ा िम्बर अथर्ा ई-मेल आईडी, िहां लागू हो; और 

(ठ) सभी अजिर्ायव और स्ट्रै्जच्छक प्रभारों िैसे दक जडलीर्री प्रभार, डाक और हडैं पलंग प्रभार, पररर्हि प्रभार 
और लागू कर को ििावते हुए जर्र्रणात्समक मूल्य सजहत एकल आंकड़ों म ें कुल मूल्य: 

परंतु दकसी जर्के्रता द्वारा इलेकरॉजिक रूप में िारी दकए गए बीिक, जबल, िकिी रसीि अथर्ा रसीि के मामले 
में, जर्के्रता के हस्ट्ताक्षर की आर्श्यकता िहीं ह।ै 

(2) जर्के्रता द्वारा िारी दकए गए बीिक, जबल, िकिी रसीि अथर्ा रसीि पर क्रम संख्या दकसी भी पररजस्ट्थजत म ें
पररर्र्तवत, जर्कृत, बिली अथर्ा जमटाई िहीं िाएगी। 

[फा. सं. िे-10/6/2018-सीपीयू] 

 अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर् 
 

 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15 July, 2020 

G.S.R. 449(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and clauses (b) and (c) of sub-

section (2) of section 101 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central Government hereby makes 
the following rules, namely:- 
 



18  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

1. Short title and commencement. — (1) These rules may be called the Consumer Protection (General) Rules, 
2020. 

th
(2)  They shall come into force on the 20  day of July, 2020. 
 
2. Definitions:- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,--- 

(a) ‘Act” means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 ( 35 of 2019); 
(b) ‘public utility service’ means any— 

 
(i) transport service for the carriage of passengers or goods by air, road or water; or 
(ii) postal, telegraph, telephone or broadband service; or 
(iii) supply of power, light or water or fuel or natural gas to the public by any establishment; or 
(iv) insurance service; and 
(v) service in, or in connection with, the working of any major port or dock; 

3. Public utility services to be establishments. – Public utility services shall be establishments for the purpose 
of Clause (19) of section 2. 

4. Certain activities to be exempt from unfair trade practice.–Permitting of the following activities carried 
out for promoting directly or indirectly the sale, use or supply of any product or any business interest shall be 
exempt from the purview of unfair trade practices, namely:– 

(a) lotteries allowed under the Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998 (17 of 1998); and 

(b) games of chance or skill not prohibited under the Public Gambling Act, 1867 (3 of 1867), which are 
not gambling and wherein success depends on a substantial degree of skill and not chance. 

5. Manner of issuing invoice or bill or cash memo or receipt for goods sold or services rendered.– (1) Every 
invoice, bill, cash memo or receipt for goods sold or services rendered, issued by a seller shall have the following 
minimum particulars, namely:-  

 
(a) The name and address of the seller; 
(b) a consecutive serial number not exceeding sixteen characters, in one or multiple series, 

containing letters or numerals or special characters (hyphen or dash, and slash, symbolised 
as “-” and “/” respectively) and any combination thereof, unique for a financial year;  

(c) the date of its issue; 
(d) the name of the consumer; 
(e) the description of goods or services; 
(f) the quantity, in case of goods; 
(g) the shipping address, where applicable;   
(h) the taxable value and discounts; 
(i) the rate of tax; 
(j) the signature of the seller or his authorised representative;  
(k) the customer care number or e-mail ID, where available, and 
(l) the total price in single figure, along with the breakup price showing all the compulsory 

and voluntary charges, such as delivery charges, postage and handling charges, conveyance 
charges and the applicable tax: 

Provided that where such invoice, bill, cash memo or receipt is issued by a seller in electronic form, 
the signature of the seller is not required. 

(2)   The serial number on the invoice, bill, cash memo or receipt to be issued by a seller shall not be altered, 
removed, replaced, or erased under any circumstances. 
 

[F.No.J-10/6/2018-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 



रजजस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99 
 

 

सी.जी.-डी.एxलxxGIDHxxx xx.x-GअI.D-E1x6x0x 72020-220550
CG-DL-E-16072020-220550

असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग II—खण्ड 3—उप-खण्ड (i)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   344] नई ददल्ली,  बधुर्ार, जलुाई 15, 2020/आषाढ़ 24,  1942  
No. 344] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JULY  15,  2020/ASHADHA  24, 1942  

 

उपभोक्ता मामल,े खाद्य और सार्जव जनक जर्तरण मतं्रालय 

(उपभोक्ता मामल ेजर्भाग) 

अजधसचूना 

नई ददल्ली, 15 जुलाई, 2020 

सा.का.जन.  447(अ).—कें द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 ( 2019 का 35) की धारा 101 की 

उप-धारा (2) के खंड (घ), (ङ) और (य ञ) द्वारा प्रदत्त िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करत ेहुए, जनम्नजलजखत जनयम बनाती ह,ैं  अथावत्:- 

1. सजंक्षप्त नाम और प्रारम्भ – (1) इन जनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम उपभोक्ता संरक्षण (कें द्रीय उपभोक्ता संरक्षण पररषद) 

जनयम, 2020 ह।ै 

(2) ये 20 जुलाई, 2020  को प्ररृ्त्त होंगे। 

2. पररभाषाएं – (1) इन जनयमों म,ें  जब तक दक संदभव की अन्यथा अपेजक्षत हो, - 

(क) ‘अजधजनयम’ से उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) ‘कें द्रीय पररषद’ से अजधजनयम की धारा 3 की उप-धारा (1) के अधीन स्ट्थाजपत कें द्रीय उपभोक्ता 

संरक्षण पररषद अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ग) ‘अध्यक्ष’ से कें द्रीय पररषद का अध्यक्ष अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(घ) ‘अनुसूची’ से इन जनयमों के साथ संलग्न अनुसूची अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ङ) ‘राज्य’ में संघ राज्य क्षेत्र सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

3145 GI/2020 (1) 
 
 

 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(2) इनम ें उपयोग दकए गए ऐसे िब्द और र्ाकयांि, जजन्ह ें इनमें पररभाजषत नहीं दकया गया ह ैपरंत ुअजधजनयम 

में पररभाजषत दकया गया ह,ै का अथव र्ही होगा जैसा अजधजनयम में पररभाजषत दकया गया हो। 

3. कें द्रीय पररषद की सरंचना – कें द्रीय सरकार, राजपत्र में अजधसूचना द्वारा कें द्रीय पररषद की स्ट्थापना करेगी जजसमें 

जनम्नजलजखत सदस्ट्य होंग,े जजनकी संख्या छत्तीस से अजधक नहीं होगी, अथावत ्:- 

(क) कें द्रीय सरकार म ें उपभोक्ता मामले के प्रभारी मंत्री, जो कें द्रीय पररषद के अध्यक्ष होंग;े 

(ख) कें द्रीय सरकार में उपभोक्ता मामले के प्रभारी राज्य मंत्री (जजनके पास स्ट्र्तंत्र प्रभार नहीं ह)ै अथर्ा उप 

मंत्री, जो कें द्रीय पररषद के उपाध्यक्ष होंग;े 

(ग) अनुसूची I म ें यथाउजल्लजखत प्रत्येक क्षेत्र, जजन्ह ें प्रत्येक बार कें द्रीय पररषद का कायवकाल समाप्त होने पर 

चक्रानुक्रम के आधार पर बदला जाएगा, से दो राज्यों के उपभोक्ता मामल ेके प्रभारी मंत्री; 

(घ) अनुसूची II म ें यथाउजल्लजखत दकसी संघ राज्य क्षेत्र के प्रिासक (चाह ेरे् प्रिासक अथर्ा उप राज्यपाल के 

रूप में जर्जनर्ददष्ट हों), जो उस संघ राज्य क्षेत्र का प्रजतजनजधत्र् करेंगे, जजन्ह ें प्रत्येक बार कें द्रीय पररषद का 

कायवकाल समाप्त होने पर चक्रानुक्रम के आधार पर बदला जाएगा; 

(ङ) दो संसद सदस्ट्य – एक लोक सभा से और एक राज्य सभा से।    

(च) उपभोक्ता जहतों से संबंजधत कें द्रीय सरकार के जर्भागों, स्ट्र्ायत्त संगठनों अथर्ा जर्जनयामकों के प्रजतजनजध, 

जजनकी संख्या पांच से अजधक नहीं होगी, जजन्ह ें कें द्रीय सरकार द्वारा नाजमत दकया जाएगा; 

(छ) कें द्रीय उपभोक्ता संरक्षण प्राजधकरण के मुख्य आयकु्त; 

(ज) रजजस्ट् रार, राष्ट्रीय उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाद प्रजततोष आयोग, नई ददल्ली; 

(झ) उपभोक्ता संगठनों के प्रजतजनजध, जजनकी संख्या पांच से अजधक नहीं होगी, जजन्ह ें कें द्रीय सरकार द्वारा 

नाजमत दकया जाएगा; 

(ञ) उपभोक्ता संगठनों, उपभोक्ता सदक्रय कायवकताव, अनुसंधान एरं् प्रजिक्षण संगठनों, अकादमीजियनों, कृषकों, 

व्यापार अथर्ा उद्योग-जगत से जलए उपभोक्ता जहतों का प्रजतजनजधत्र् करने में सक्षम अनुभूत जर्िेषज्ञता 

और अनुभर् रखने र्ाले प्रजतजनजध, जजनकी संख्या अनुसूची I में ददए गए प्रत्येक क्षेत्र से एक होगी, जो पांच 

से अजधक नहीं होगी, जजनमें से कम-से-कम एक मजहला होगी। 

(ट) राज्यों के उपभोक्ता मामल ेके प्रभारी सजचर्, जजनकी संख्या तीन से अजधक नहीं होगी, जजन्ह ें कें द्रीय सरकार 

द्वारा नाजमत दकया जाएगा। 

(ठ) कें द्रीय सरकार के उपभोक्ता मामले के प्रभारी सजचर्, कें द्रीय पररषद के सदस्ट्य-सजचर् होंगे।  

4. कें द्रीय पररषद का कायकव ाल – कें द्रीय पररषद का कायवकाल तीन र्षव को होगा: 

परंतु कें द्रीय पररषद तीन माह के अजधक अर्जध अथर्ा इसका पुनगवठन दकए जान ेकी अर्जध तक, जो भी पहल ेहो, 

कायव करती रहगेी। 

5. कें द्रीय पररषद के सदस्ट्यों का त्यागपत्र – कोई भी सदस्ट्य, कें द्रीय पररषद के अध्यक्ष को सम्बोजधत स्ट्र्यं के द्वारा 

जलजखत सूचना दतेे हुए, कें द्रीय पररषद से त्यागपत्र द ेसकता ह।ै 

6. त्यागपत्र के कारण उत्पन्न हुई ररजक्त- (1) जनयम 5 के अधीन दकसी सदस्ट्य के त्यागपत्र के कारण उत्पन्न हुई ररजक्त 

को कें द्रीय सरकार द्वारा सदस्ट्यों की उसी श्रेणी से नई जनयुजक्त के माध्यम से भरा जाएगा।  

(2) जनयम 5 के अधीन दकसी सदस्ट्य के त्यागपत्र के कारण उत्पन्न हुई ररजक्त भरन े के जलए जनयुक्त दकया गया 

व्यजक्त केर्ल उसी अर्जध तक पद पर रहगेा जजस अर्जध के जलए, यदद ररजक्त उत्पन्न न हुई होती, मूल सदस्ट्य पद 

पर रहने का हकदार था। 



 [भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का   राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 

7. काय व समहू – (1) अजधजनयम के अधीन अपन ेकायों का जनष्पादन करन ेके प्रयोजन से, कें द्रीय पररषद इसके सदस्ट्यों 

में से ऐसे कायव समूह का गठन कर सकती ह,ै जजसे यह आर्श्यक समझे और इस प्रकार गरठत दकया गया प्रत्येक 

कायव समूह ऐसे सभी कायों का जनष्पादन करेगा जो कें द्रीय पररषद द्वारा इसे सौंपे जाएंगे।  

(2) कें द्रीय पररषद प्रत्येक कायव समूह को स्ट्पष्ट रूप से पररभाजषत ऐसे कायव सौंपेगी जो जर्चाराथव जर्षयों के 

माध्यम से जर्जनर्ददष्ट दकए जाएं. और जजसमें र्ह समयार्जध भी सजम्मजलत होगी जजसके भीतर ऐसे कायव पूरे दकए 

जाने ह।ैं  

(3) काय व समूह कें द्रीय पररषद के अध्यक्ष को ररपोटव करेंगे। 

(4) प्रत्येक कायव समूह के जनष्कषों को कें द्रीय पररषद के जर्चाराथव इसके समक्ष प्रस्ट्ततु दकया जाएगा। 

(5) काय व समूह उस कायव के पूरा होने के पश्चात ्कायव करना बंद कर दगेा जजसके जलए इसे गरठत दकया गया था। 

8. काय व सचंालन के जलए कें द्रीय पररषद की बठैकें  – (1) कें द्रीय पररषद की बैठकें  साधारणतया राष्ट्रीय राजधानी क्षेत्र 

ददल्ली म ें आयोजजत की जाएंगी: 

परंतु कें द्रीय पररषद, जब अध्यक्ष का यह मत हो दक ऐसी करना उपयुक्त ह,ै भारत में दकसी अन्य स्ट्थान पर अपनी 

बैठकें  आयोजजत कर सकती ह।ै 

(2) कें द्रीय पररषद की बैठकों की अध्यक्षता पररषद के अध्यक्ष, अथर्ा उनकी अनुपजस्ट्थजत की जस्ट्थजत में, पररषद के 

उपाध्यक्ष द्वारा की जाएगी। 

(3) अध्यक्ष और उपाध्यक्ष दोनों की अनुपजस्ट्थजत के मामल े में, कें द्रीय पररषद की बैठकों की अध्यक्षता इस 

प्रयोजनाथव चुन ेगए कें द्रीय पररषद के दकसी सदस्ट्य द्वारा की जाएगी। 

(4) कें द्रीय पररषद की बैठक, अध्यक्ष के अनुमोदन से प्रत्येक सदस्ट्य को बैठक की आिजयत तारीख से कम-से-कम 

पंद्रह ददन पहले डाक अथर्ा ई-मेल के माध्यम से त्र्ररत संप्रेषण को सुकर बनाने के जलए  जलजखत सूचना देते हुए 

बुलाई जा सकती ह।ै 

(5) कें द्रीय पररषद की प्रत्येक बैठक की सूचना में बैठक का समय, तारीख और स्ट्थान तथा बैठक के जलए कायवसूची 

की मदों की जानकारी दी जाएगी। 

(6) कें द्रीय पररषद की बैठक के दौरान कायवसूची में सजम्मजलत न दकए गए दकसी भी मामले पर अध्यक्ष अथर्ा 

उपाध्यक्ष अथर्ा बैठक की अध्यक्षता करने र्ाल ेसदस्ट्य, जैसा भी मामला हो, की अनुमजत को छोड़कर, चचाव नहीं 

की जाएगी।  

(7) कें द्रीय पररषद की प्रत्येक बैठक के कायवरृ्त्त का मसौदा यथासंभर् िीघ्र और प्रत्येक बैठक के समापन से 

अजधकतम एक सप्ताह की अर्जध के भीतर तैयार दकया जाएगा तथा बैठक के कायवरृ्त्त को अध्यक्ष अथर्ा उपाध्यक्ष 

अथर्ा बैठक की अध्यक्षता करने र्ाल ेसदस्ट्य के अनुमोदनाथव प्रस्ट्तुत दकया जाएगा। 

(8) अध्यक्ष अथर्ा उपाध्यक्ष अथर्ा बैठक की अध्यक्षता करने र्ाल ेसदस्ट्य द्वारा अनुमोददत कें द्रीय पररषद की 

प्रत्येक बैठक के कायवरृ्त्त के मसौदे को अगली बैठक म ें अगंीकार दकए जान ेहते ुयथािीघ्र कें द्रीय पररषद के प्रत्येक 

सदस्ट्य को अग्रेजषत दकया जाएगा। 

(9) दकसी ररजक्त के होन ेअथर्ा कें द्रीय पररषद के गठन म ें दकसी दोष के होने मात्र से कें द्रीय पररषद की कोई भी 

कायवर्ाही अर्ैध नहीं ठहरायी जाएगी।  

9. व्यय और बठैक िलु्क की प्रजतपरू्तत – (1) कें द्रीय पररषद के गैर-स्ट्थाजनक गरै-सरकारी सदस्ट्य जनम्नजलजखत के 

हकदार होंग:े - 

(क) कें द्रीय पररषद अथर्ा काय व समूहों की बैठकों म ें भाग लेन ेके प्रयोजन से आन ेऔर जान ेकी यात्रा के संबंध म ें

दकफायती श्रेणी का हर्ाई यात्रा दकराया; 

(ख) उनके दैजनक भत्तों, आर्ास, उनके जनर्ास स्ट्थान से स्ट्टेिन अथर्ा एयरपोटव तथा स्ट्टेिन अथर्ा एयरपोटव से 

कें द्रीय पररषद अथर्ा इसके कायव समूहों की बैठक के स्ट्थान और जर्परीत क्रम म ें स्ट्थानीय पररर्हन के जलए 

दकए गए व्यय को कर्र करने के जलए, कें द्रीय पररषद अथर्ा इसके कायवसमूहों की बैठक के प्रत्येक ददन के 

जलए पांच हजार रूपये की राजि। 



4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(2) उप-जनयम (1) के अधीन दकया गया प्रत्येक दार्ा कें द्रीय पररषद के सदस्ट्य द्वारा इस प्रमाणन के अध्यधीन 

होगा दक रे् कें द्रीय पररषद अथर्ा इसके दकसी कायवसमूह की बैठक में भाग लेन ेके प्रयोजन से अपने दौरे के दौरान 

कें द्रीय सरकार के दकसी अन्य मतं्रालय, जर्भाग अथर्ा संगठन से दकसी लाभ का दार्ा नहीं करेंगे।   

(3) कें द्रीय पररषद अथर्ा इसके कायवसमूह की बैठक-स्ट्थल के स्ट्थान म ें जनर्ास करन ेर्ाले स्ट्थानीय गैर-सरकारी 

सदस्ट्य, िहर के दकसी र्गीकरण के जबना, बैठक के प्रत्येक ददन के जलए एक हजार रूपय ेतक के समेदकत दकराया 

प्रभारों का लाभ प्राप्त करने के हकदार होंगे।  

(4) कें द्रीय पररषद अथर्ा इसके कायवसमूहों की बैठकों में भाग लनेे र्ाले संसद सदस्ट्य उन दरों पर यात्रा और 

दैजनक भत्तों के हकदार होंगे जो ऐसे सदस्ट्यों को अनुमेय ह।ै 

अनसुचूी I 

[जनयम 3(3) दखे]ें  

(1) पूर्ी क्षेत्र – में जबहार, छत्तीसगढ़, झारखंड, ओजडिा और बंगाल राज्य सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

(2) पजश्चम क्षेत्र – में गोर्ा, गुजरात, महाराष्ट्र, मध्य प्रदेि और राजस्ट्थान राज्य सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

(3) उत्तरी क्षेत्र – में हररयाणा, जहमाचल प्रदिे, पंजाब, उत्तर प्रदिे और उत्तराखंड राज्य सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

(4) दजक्षणी क्षेत्र – में आंध्र प्रदिे, कनावटक, केरल, तजमलनाडु और तेलगंाना राज्य सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

(5) उत्तर पूर्ी क्षेत्र – में अरूणाचल प्रदेि, असम, मजणपुर, मेघालय, जमजोरम, नागालडैं , जत्रपरुा और जसदिम 

राज्य सजम्मजलत ह।ैं  

अनसुचूी II 

[जनयम 3 (4) दखे]ें  

अंदमान और जनकोबार द्वीपसमहू, चंडीगढ़, दादरा और नागर हरे्ली तथा दमण और दीर्, जम्मू एरं् कश्मीर, 

लद्दाख, लक्षद्वीप, पुडुचेरी, राष्ट्रीय राजधानी क्षेत्र ददल्ली के संघ राज्य क्षेत्र। 

फा. सं. जे-10/2/2019-सीपीयू 

अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर् 

 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 

(Department of Consumer Affairs) 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15th July, 2020 

G.S.R. 447(E).—In exercise  of the powers conferred by clauses (d),(e) and (zj) of  sub-section 
(2) of section 101 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central Government hereby 
makes the following rules, namely:–– 

1. Short title and commencement. — (1) These rules may be called the Consumer Protection 
(Central Consumer Protection Council) Rules, 2020. 

th
(2) They shall come into force on the 20  day of July,2020. 

2. Definitions. — (1)  ln these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,— 

(a) ―Act‖ means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019); 

(b) ―Central Council‖ means the Central Consumer Protection Council established 
under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Act; 

(c) ―Chairperson‖ means the chairperson of the Central Council; 

(d) ―Schedule‖ means a Schedule appended to these rules; 

(e) ―State‖  include Union territory. 

 



 [भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का   राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 

(2)  The words and expressions used herein, but not defined, and defined in the Act shall have the 
meaning assigned to them in the Act. 

3. Composition of  Central Council. — The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish the Central Council which shall consist of the following members, not 
exceeding thirty-six, namely: — 

(a) the Minister in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government who shall be the 
Chairperson of the Central Council; 

(b)  the Minister of State (where he is not holding independent charge) or Deputy Minister in 
charge of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government who shall be the Vice-Chairperson 
of the Central Council; 

(c) the Minister in-charge of Consumer Affairs of two of the States from each region as 
mentioned in Schedule I to be changed by rotation on expiration of the term of the Central 
Council on each occasion; 

(d) an administrator (whether designated as administrator or Lieutenant Governor) of a Union 
territory, to represent that Union territory, as mentioned in Schedule II, to be changed by 
rotation on expiration of the term of the Central Council on each occasion; 

(e) two Members of Parliament—one from the Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha; 

(f) representatives of Departments of the Central Government, autonomous organisations or 
regulators concerned with consumer interests, not exceeding five to be nominated by the 
Central Government; 

(g)  the Chief Commissioner of the Central Consumer Protection Authority; 

(h)  the Registrar, National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi; 

(i)  representatives of consumer organisations not exceeding five, to be nominated by the 
Central Government; 

(j)     representatives with proven expertise and experience who are capable of representing 
consumer interests, drawn from amongst consumer organisations, consumer activists, 
research and training organisations, academicians, farmers, trade or industry, not exceeding 
five, one from each of the regions specified in Schedule I, of whom at least one shall be a 
woman; 

(k)  the Secretaries in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the States, not exceeding three, to  be 
nominated by the Central Government; 

(l)  the Secretary in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government shall be the 
Member-Secretary of the Central Council. 

4. Term of Central Council. –– The term of the Central Council shall be three years: 

          Provided that the Central Council shall continue to function for a further period of three months or 
till it is reconstituted, whichever is earlier. 

5. Resignation of members of Central Council. –– Any member may, by notice in writing under 
his hand addressed to the Chairperson of the Central Council, resign from the Central Council. 

6. Vacancy caused by resignation. –– (1) A vacancy caused by the resignation of a member under 
rule 5 shall be filled by a fresh appointment from the same category of members by the Central 
Government. 

(2)  The person appointed to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of a member under rule 5 
shall hold office only for the period of time that the original member would have been entitled to hold 
office had the vacancy not occurred. 

7.  Working Groups. — (1) For the purposes of performing its functions under the Act, the Central 
Council may constitute from amongst its members, such working groups as it may deem necessary, and 
every working group so constituted shall perform such task as are assigned to it by the Central Council.  



6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(2)   The Central Council shall entrust to each working group clearly defined tasks which are specified 
through terms of reference, and which shall also include the time-period within which such task are to be 
completed. 

(3) The working groups shall report to the Chairperson of the Central Council. 

(4) The findings of each working group shall be placed before the Central Council for its consideration. 

(5) The working group shall cease to function on the completion of the task for which it was 
constituted. 

8.  Meetings of Central Council for transaction of business. — (1) The meetings of the Central 
Council shall ordinarily be held in the National Capital Territory of  Delhi: 

Provided that the Central Council may also hold its meetings at any other place   in India, 
wherever in the opinion of the Chairperson, it is expedient so to do. 

(2) The Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the 
Central Council.  

(3) In the absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson, the meetings of the Central 
Council shall be presided over by a member of the Central Council elected for this purpose.   

(4) A meeting of the Central Council may be called with the approval of the Chairperson by issuing a 
notice in writing to every member at least fifteen days before the intended date of the meeting by 
post, or through e-mail to facilitate speedy communication. 

(5) The notice of every meeting of the Central Council shall intimate the time, date, and place of the 
meeting and the items of agenda for the meeting. 

(6) Any business not included in the agenda shall not be transacted at a meeting of the Central 
Council except with the permission of the Chairperson, or the Vice-Chairperson, or the member 
presiding over the meeting, as the case may be. 

(7) The draft minutes of each meeting of the Central Council shall be prepared as soon as possible 
and not later than one week from the conclusion of each meeting and the same shall be submitted 
to the Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson or to the member who presided over the meeting for 
his approval. 

(8) The draft minutes of each meeting of the Central Council approved by the Chairperson or the 
Vice-Chairperson or the member who presided over this meeting shall be forwarded to each 
member of the Central Council as soon as possible for adoption at the next meeting. 

(9) No proceedings of the Central Council shall be invalid merely by reasons of existence of any 
vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the Central Council. 

9. Reimbursement of expenses and sitting fees.— (1) Non-local non-official members of the 
Central Council shall be entitled to:–– 

(a) avail economy class airfare in connection with journeys undertaken to and from for 
the purpose of attending meetings of the Central Council or the working groups;  

(b) a sum of rupees five thousand per each day of the meeting of the Central Council or 
its working groups as incidental charges to cover the expenditure towards their daily 
allowance, lodging, local conveyance from their place of residence to the station or 
airport and from the station or airport to the venue of meeting of the Central Council 
or its working groups, and vice-versa.  

(2)  Every claim made under sub-rule (1) shall be subject to the member of the Central Council 
certifying that he shall not claim any benefit from any other ministry, department or organisation 
of the Central Government during his visit for the purpose of attending the meeting of the Central 
Council or any of its working groups. 

(3) Local non-official members residing at the place of the venue of the meeting of the Central 
Council or its working groups, shall be entitled to avail consolidated conveyance hire charges of 
up to rupees one thousand per each day of the meeting irrespective of the classification of the city. 



 [भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का   राजपत्र : असाधारण 7 

(4) Members of Parliament attending meetings of the Central Council or its working groups 
shall be entitled to travelling and daily allowances at such rates as are admissible to such 
Members. 

SCHEDULE I 

[See rule 3 (3)] 

(1) Eastern Region - to consist of the States of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, and West 
Bengal. 

(2) Western Region - to consist of the States of Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan.  

(3) Northern Region - to consist of the States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand. 

(4) Southern Region - to consist of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu 
and Telangana.  

(5) North Eastern Region – to consist of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim. 

SCHEDULE II 

[See rule 3 (4)] 

The Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and  Daman and Diu, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Puducherry,  the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi.   

 [F. No. J-10/2/2019-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 



रजिस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99 

 

 

सी.जी.-डी.एxलxx.-GअID.-H1x6x0x7 2020-220551
xxxGIDExxx 

CG-DL-E-16072020-220551

असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण्ड (i)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   348] िई दिल्ली,  बधुर्ार, िुलाई 15, 2020/आषाढ़  24, 1942  
No. 348] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JULY  15, 2020/ASHADHA  24, 1942  

 

उपभोक्ता मामल,े खाद्य और सार्िव जिक जर्तरण मतं्रालय 

(उपभोक्ता मामल ेजर्भाग) 

अजधसचूिा 

िई दिल्ली, 15 िुलाई, 2020 

सा.का.जि. 452(अ).––केन्द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजियम, 2019 (2019 का 35) की धारा 

101 की उपधारा (2) के खंड (ढ) और (ब) के साथ पठित धारा 29 और 43 के अधीि प्रित्त िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करत े

हुए जिम्नजलजखत जियम बिाती ह,ै अथावत -  

1. संजक्षप्त िाम और प्रारम्भ.––(1) इि जियमों का संजक्षप्त उपभोक्ता संरक्षण (राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग 

के अध्यक्ष और सिस्ट्यों की जियुजक्त के जलए अहतव ा, भती की पद्धजत, जियुजक्त की प्रदिया, कायवकाल, पि से 
त्यागपत्र और हटािा) जियम, 2020 ह।ै पठर  

(2) ये 20 िुलाई, 2020  को प्ररृ्त्त होंगे। 

2. पठरभाषाए.ं–– िब तक दक संिभ व ,इि जियमों म इ (1) –म इ अन्द्यथा आर््यक ि हो- , 

(क)  ’अजधजियम‘से उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजियम 2019) 2019 ,का (35 अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) ‘चयि सजमजत’ से जियम 6 के उप-जियम (1) मइ संिर्भवत चयि सजमजत अजभप्रेत ह;ै  

(2)  इिम इ उपयोग दकए गए ऐसे िब् िों और पि  जिन्द्ह इ इिमइ पठरभाजषत िहर दकया गया ह,ै  और अजधजियम म इ

पठरभाजषत दकया गया ह ैका अथव र्ही होगा िो अजधजियम मइ पठरभाजषत दकया गया हो ।  

3149 GI/2020 (1) 
 
 

 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

3.  राज्य आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सिस्ट्यों की जियजुक्त के जलए अहतव ाएं.––(1) कोई व्यजक्त, िो उच्च न्द्यायालय का न्द्यायाधीि 

ि हो अथर्ा ि रहा हो, अध्यक्ष के रूप मइ जियुजक्त के जलए अह व िहर होगा; 

(2)  कोई व्यजक्त, जिसकी आय ुचालीस र्षव से कम हो और जिम्नजलजखत का धारक ि हो, सिस्ट्य के रूप मइ जियुजक्त के जलए 

अह व िहर होगा; -- 

(क)  दकसी जिला न्द्यायालय के पीिासीि अजधकारी अथर्ा दकसी न्द्यायाजधकरण मइ समकक्ष स्ट्तर मइ अथर्ा जिला न्द्यायालय 

और न्द्यायाजधकरण मइ संयुक्त रूप से कम-से-कम िस र्षव का अिुभर्:  

परन्द्त ुजियुजक्त दकए िािे र्ाल ेसिस्ट्यों की संख्या पचास प्रजतित से अजधक िहर होगी; अथर्ा  

(ख)  दकसी मान्द्यताप्राप्त जर्श्वजर्द्यालय से स्नातक की उपाजध और योग्यता, सत्यजिष्ठापणू व और प्रजतजष्ठत व्यजक्त हो और 

उपभोक्ता मामले, जर्जध, लोक मामले, प्रिासि, अथविात्र, , र्ाजणज्य, उद्योग, जर्त्त, प्रबंधि, अजभयांजत्रकी, प्र्द्योजगकी, लोक 
स्ट्र्ास्ट््य अथर्ा औषजध मइ जर्िषे ज्ञाि और कम-से-कम बीस र्षव का अिुभर्; 

(3) राज्य आयोग का कम-से-कम एक सिस्ट्य अथर्ा अध्यक्ष मजहला होगी।  

4. जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सिस्ट्यों की जियजुक्त के जलए अहतव ाएं.––(1)  कोई व्यजक्त, िो जिला न्द्यायालय का 

न्द्यायाधीि ि हो अथर्ा ि रहा हो अथर्ा होि ेके जलए अह व ि हो, अध्यक्ष के रूप म इ जियुजक्त के जलए अह व िहर होगा;. 

(2)  कोई व्यजक्त सिस्ट्य के रूप मइ जियुजक्त के जलए तभी अह व होगा िब र्ह -   

क) कम-से-कम पैंतीस र्षव की आयु का हो;  

ख) दकसी मान्द्यताप्राप्त जर्श्वजर्द्यालय से स्नाजतक की उपाजध प्राप्त हो; और   

ग) क्षमतार्ाि, सत्यजिष्ठापूण व और प्रजतजष्ठत व्यजक्त हो और उपभोक्ता मामल,े जर्जध, लोक मामल,े प्रिासि, अथविात्र, , 
र्ाजणज्य, उद्योग, जर्त्त, प्रबंधि, अजभयांजत्रकी, प्र्द्योजगकी, लोक स्ट्र्ास्ट््य अथर्ा औषजध म इ जर्िेष ज्ञाि और कम-
से-कम पंरह र्ष व का अिुभर् रखता हो; 

(3)  जिला आयोग का कम-से-कम एक सिस्ट्य अथर्ा अध्यक्ष मजहला होगी।  

5. राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य की जियजुक्त के जलए अिहतव ा.––कोई व्यजक्त राज्य आयोग अथर्ा 

जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य के रूप म इ जियुजक्त के जलए अिह व होगा यदि र्ह - 

(1) ऐसे दकसी अपराध जिसमइ िैजतक अधमता सजम्मजलत हो, के जलए अजभयोजित दकया गया हो और 
कारार्ास की सिा प्राप्त हो; अथर्ा  

(2) दिर्ाजलया घोजषत दकया गया हो; अथर्ा  

(3) दकसी सक्षम न्द्यायालय द्वारा अस्ट्र्स्ट्थ मजस्ट्तष्क और सोच का घोजषत दकया गया हो;  अथर्ा  

(4) राज्य सरकार अथर्ा कइ न्द्रीय सरकार अथर्ा ऐसी सरकार के स्ट्र्ाजमत्र्ाधीि अथर्ा जियंत्रणाधीि दकसी 
जिकाय कापोरेट की सेर्ा से हटाया गया हो अथर्ा जिष्काजसत दकया गया हो; अथर्ा  

(5) राज्य सरकार की राय मइ, अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य के रूप मइ उसके कायों से जर्त्तीय अथर्ा अन्द्य लाभों पर 
हाजिकारक प्रभार् पड़ि ेकी संभार्िा हो।   

6. जियजुक्त की प्रदिया.––(1) राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सिस्ट्यों की जियुजक्त राज्य सरकार द्वारा 

चयि सजमजत की जसफाठरिों पर की िाएगी, जिसमइ जिम्नजलजखत व्यजक्त सजम्मजलत होंग,े अथावत -– 

(क)    उच्च न्द्यायालय के मुख्य न्द्यायाधीि अथर्ा उिके द्वारा िाम जर्िेजित उच्च न्द्यायालय का कोई अन्द्य 

न्द्यायाधीि – अध्यक्ष; 

(ख)       राज्य सरकार के उपभोक्ता मामले के प्रभारी सजचर् – सिस्ट्य; 

(ग)        राज्य के मुख्य सजचर् के िाजमजत – सिस्ट्य। 



 [भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का   रािपत्र : असाधारण  3 

(2) राज्य सरकार के उपभोक्ता मामलों के प्रभारी सजचर् चयि सजमजत के संयोिक होंगे। 

(3) चयि सजमजत के अध्यक्ष की ठरजक्त अथर्ा अिुपजस्ट्थजत के जसर्ाय चयि सजमजत म इ दकसी ठरजक्त अथर्ा 
अिुपजस्ट्थजत के कारण मात्र से अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य की कोई भी जियुजक्त अर्ैध िहर होगी। 

(4) राज्य सरकार द्वारा जियुजक्त की प्रदिया पि ठरक्त होिे से कम से कम छः पूर्व आरम्भ की िाएगी। 

(5) यदि कोई पि सिस्ट्य द्वारा त्यागपत्र अथर्ा उसकी मृत्युअथर्ा दकसी िए पि के सृिि के कारण ठरक्त होता 

ह,ै तो पि को भरि ेकी प्रदिया पि के ठरक्त होिे अथर्ा िया पि सृजित होि,े िैसा भी मामला हो, के 

तत्काल पश्चात आरम्भ की िाएगी।   

(6) दकसी पि के जलए पात्र अभ्यर्थवयों से आरे्िि आमंजत्रत करि ेहतेु ठरजक्त जर्ज्ञापि को प्रमुख समाचारपत्रों 

मइ प्रकाजित दकया िाएगा और ऐसे अन्द्य रीजत से पठरचाजलत दकया िाएगा, िो राज्य सरकार द्वारा 

उजचत समझी िाएं। 

(7) ऐसे आरे्ििों की प्राजप्त के जलए जिधावठरत अंजतम जतजथ तक प्राप्त हुए आरे्ििों की िांच के पश्चात्, पात्र 
अभ्यर्थवयों की एक सूची उिके आरे्ििों सजहत चयि सजमजत के समक्ष प्रस्ट्तुत की िाएगी।   

(8) चयि सजमजत उसे अग्रेजषत पात्र आरे्िकों के सभी आरे्ििों पर जर्चार करेगी और यदि सजमजत, 
यदि आर््यक समझे, तो स्ट्र्य ंद्वारा जिधावठरत माििडंों के अिसुार आरे्िकों की छंटिी कर सकती 
ह।ै 

(9) चयि सजमजत राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग की अपेक्षाओं को ध्याि मइ रखते हुए और उपयुक्तता, 
जर्गत काय-व जिष्पािि के अजभलेख, सत्यजिष्ठा और अजधजिणयव ि अिुभर् पर जर्चार करत े हुए अपिी 
जसफाठरिइ करिे के जलए अपिी प्रदिया जिधावठरत कर सकती ह।ै 

(10) चयि सजमजत राज्य सरकार के जर्चाराथ व मेठरट के िम मइ जियुजक्त के जलए अभ्यर्थवयों के िामों के एक 
पैिल की जसफाठरि करेगी। 

(11) राज्य सरकार अििुंजसत अभ्यर्थवयों के प्रमाणपत्रों और पूर्वरृ्त्तों का सत्यापि करेगी अथर्ा कराएगी। 

(12) प्रत्येक अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य की जियुजक्त इि जियमों के साथ संलग्न अिुलग्नक म इ यथाइंजगत िारीठरक 
स्ट्र्ास्ट््य प्रमाणपत्र, जिसे जसजर्ल सिवि अथर्ा जिला जचदकत्सा अजधकारी द्वारा जर्जधर्त हस्ट्ताक्षठरत 
दकया गया हो, प्रस्ट्ततु दकए िािे के अध्यधीि होगी।   

(13) जियुक्त के पूर्व, चयजित अभ्यथी एक िपथपत्र प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा दक उसके कोई जर्त्तीय अथर्ा अन्द्य लाभ िहर 
ह ैअथर्ा िहर होंग ेजििसे अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य के रूप म इ उसके कायवकरण पर हाजिकारक प्रभार् पड़ि े
की संभार्िा हो।   

7. राज्य आयोग और जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य द्वारा त्यागपत्र.––अध्यक्ष अथर्ा कोई सिस्ट्य दकसी भी 

समय, अपिी हस्ट्तजलजप मइ राज्य सरकार को सम्बोजधत जलजखत पत्र द्वारा, अपि ेपि से त्यागपत्र िे सकता ह:ै 

परन्द्त ुअध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य, िब तक दक राज्य सरकार द्वारा कायावलय को िीघ्र छोड़ि ेकी अिुमजत ि िी िाए, ऐसे सूचिा 
की प्राजप्त की तारीख से तीि माह की अर्जध की समाजप्त तक अथर्ा उत्तराजधकारी के रूप म इ जर्जधर्त जियुक्त दकसी 
व्यजक्त के उसका पिभार ग्रहण करिे तक अथर्ा उसके कायवकाल की समाजप्त तक, िो भी हो, पि पर बिा रहगेा। 

 8.   राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य को पि स ेहटाया िािा.––(1) राज्य सरकार दकसी ऐसे 

अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य को पि से हटाएगी, िो — 

(क)       दिर्ाजलया घोजषत दकया गया हो; अथर्ा  

(ख)       दकसी ऐसे अपराध जिसमइ िैजतक अधमता सजम्मजलत हो, मइ अजभयोजित दकया गया हो; अथर्ा  

                        (ग)       ऐसे सिस्ट्य के रूप मइ कायव करि ेमइ िारीठरक अथर्ा मािजसक रूप से अक्षम हो गया हो; अथर्ा  

(घ)        ऐसे जर्त्तीय अथर्ा अन्द्य लाभों का अजधग्रहण दकया हो जििसे दकसी सिस्ट्य के रूप मइ उसके 

कायवकरण पर हाजिकारक प्रभार् पड़ि ेकी संभार्िा हो; अथर्ा 



4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

(ड)       पि का इस प्रकार िरुूपयोग दकया गया हो जिससे लोक जहत मइ उसका पि पर बिा रहिा 

हाजिकारक हो: 

परन्द्त ुिब दकसी अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य को खंड (ग) से (ङ) मइ जर्जिर्िष्टव  दकन्द्ही आधारों पर हटाए िािे का 
प्रस्ट्तार् दकया गया हो, अध्यक्ष  अथर्ा सिस्ट्य को उिके जर्रूि ्लगाए गए आरोपों के बारे मइ सूजचत दकया िाएगा 
और उि आरोपों के संबंध म इ उन्द्ह इ सुिे िाि ेका अर्सर प्रिाि दकया िाएगा। 

9.  राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य के िवु्यर्व हार अथर्ा अक्षमता की िाचं की प्रदिया.––  

(1) यदि राज्य सरकार को कोई ऐसी जिकायत प्राप्त होती ह ैजिसमइ राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष 

अथर्ा दकसी सिस्ट्य के संबंध म इ पि के कायों का जिष्पािि करिे के जलए िवु्यवर्हार अथर्ा अक्षमता के दकसी जिजश्चत 
आरोप के जलए आरोजपत दकया गया हो, तो राज्य सरकार ऐसी जिकायत की प्राथजमक संर्ीक्षा करेगी। 

(2)  यदि प्राथजमक िांच के बाि, राज्य सरकार की यह राय ह ै दक राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष 

अथर्ा दकसी सिस्ट्य के दकसी िवु्यवर्हार अथर्ा अक्षमता के सत्य मइ िांच करि ेके तकव संगत आधार ह,ैं  तो यह राज्य 
आयोग के मामले मइ राष्ट्रीय आयोग को तथा जिला आयोग के मामले मइ राज्य आयोग को िांच करिे के जलए संिर्भवत 
करेगी। 

(3)  राष्ट्रीय आयोग अथर्ा राज्य आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, तीि माह की अर्जध के भीतर अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय आयोग 

िर्ारा यथाजर्जिर्िष्टव  दकसी अन्द्य अर्जध के भीतर िांच पूरी करेगा। 

(4)  िांच पूरी होिे के पश्चात्, राष्ट्रीय आयोग अथर्ा राज्य आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, राज्य सरकार को अपिी 

ठरपोटव प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा जिसमइ र्ह पृथक रूप से प्रत्येक आरोप के संबंध मइ अपिे जिष्कषों और उसके कारणों के साथ 
सम्पूणव मामल ेपर उि प्रेक्षणों का उल्लेख करेगा, िो र्ह उजचत समझे। 

(5)  राष्ट्रीय आयोग अथर्ा राज्य आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, जसजर्ल प्रदिया संजहता, 1908 (1908 का 5) द्वारा 

जिधावठरत प्रदिया के जलए बाध्य िहर होगा परन्द्तु िैसर्गवक न्द्याय के जसद्धांतों के अिुसार कायव करेगा तथा उसके पास 
अपिी स्ट्र्यं की प्रदिया जर्जियजमत करिे सजहत उसकी िांच के जलए तारीख, स्ट्थाि और समय का जिधावठरत करि े
की िजक्तयां होंगी। 

10. अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सिस्ट्य का कायकव ाल.––राज्य आयोग तथा जिला आयोग के अध्यक्ष तथा प्रत्येक सिस्ट्य चार र्ष व

की अर्जध अथर्ा पैंसि र्षव की आयु, िो भी पहल ेहो, तक पि पर रहगइ े तथा पैंसि र्षव की आयु के अध्यधीि चार 
र्षव के िसूरे कायवकाल के जलए पुिःजियुजक्त के पात्र होंगे तथा ऐसी पुिःजियुजक्त चयि सजमजत की जसफाठरि के आधार 
पर की िाएगी।   

[फा. सं. िे-10/7/2018-सीपीय]ू 

                                                                                                       अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर्  

अिलुग्नक 

[जियम 6 (12) िेख]इ  

िारीठरक स्ट्र्ास्ट््य का प्रमाणपत्र  

मैं जर्जधर्त प्रमाजणत करता ह ंदक मैंिे श्री/श्रीमती/सुश्री ............................................ की िांच की ह ैऔर मिैं े 
उिमइ ....................... के जसर्ाय कोई बीमारी (संिामक अथर्ा अन्द्यथा), िाठररीक जिबवलता अथर्ा िारीठरक 
अिक्तता िहर पाई ह।ै मैं इसे राज्य/जिला उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाि प्रजततोष आयोग मइ चार र्षव की अर्जध अथर्ा पैंसि र्ष व
की आयु, िो भी पहले हो, तक सिस्ट्य के रूप म इ जियोिि के जलए उिकी अिहतव ा िहर मािता ह।ं 

तारीख………. 

अभ्यथी का हस्ट्ताक्षर  
हस्ट्ताक्षर 
पििाम 

(जसजर्ल सिवि/जिला जचदकत्सा अजधकारी) 

 



 [भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का   रािपत्र : असाधारण  5 
 

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 

(Department of Consumer Affairs) 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15th July, 2020 

G.S.R. 452(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sections 29 and 43, read with clauses (n) and 
(w) of sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central 
Government hereby makes the following rules, namely: - 

1.  Short title and commencement.—(1)These rules may be called the Consumer Protection (Qualification for 
appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the 
President and members of the State Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020. 

th
(2)  They shall come into force on the 20  day of July, 2020. 

2.     Definitions.—(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, - 

(a) “Act” means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019); 

(b)  “Selection Committee” means the Selection Committee referred to in sub-rule (1) of 
rule 6; 

(2)  The words and expressions used herein, but not defined and defined in the Act shall have the 
same meaning assigned to them in the Act. 

3.  Qualifications for appointment of President and members of the State Commission.—(1) A person shall 
not be qualified for appointment as President, unless he is, or has been, a Judge of the High Court; 

(2)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member unless he is of not less than forty years of age 
and possesses-- 

(a)  an experience of at least ten years as presiding officer of a district court or of any tribunal at equivalent level 
or combined service as such in the district court and tribunal:    

Provided that not more than fifty percent of such members shall be appointed; or 

(b)  a bachelor’s degree from a recognised university  and is a person of ability, integrity and standing, and has  
special knowledge  and professional experience of not less than twenty years in consumer affairs, law, public 
affairs, administration, economics, commerce, industry, finance, management, engineering, technology, public 
health or  medicine: 

 (3) At least one member or the President of the State Commission shall be a woman.  

4.  Qualifications for appointment of President and member of District Commission.—(1)  A person shall 
not be qualified for appointment as President, unless he is, or has been  , or is qualified to be a District 
Judge. 

(2)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as member unless he-  

     (a)      is of not less than thirty-five years of age;   

     (b)      possesses a bachelor’s degree from a recognised University; and  

 (c)   is a person  of ability, integrity and standing, and having special knowledge  and professional 
experience of not less than fifteen years in consumer affairs, law, public affairs, administration, economics, 
commerce, industry, finance, management, engineering, technology, public health or medicine . 

(3)  At least one member or the President of the District Commission shall be a woman. 

5. Disqualification for appointment of President or member of State Commission and District 
Commission.––A person shall be disqualified for appointment as the President or a member of a State 
Commission or District Commission if he— 

(1)      has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which involves moral 
turpitude; or 

(2)          has been adjudged to be insolvent; or 

(3)          is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 

(4)     has been removed or dismissed from the service of the State  Government or Central 
Government or a  body corporate owned or controlled by such Government; or 



6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
(5)        has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or other interest as is likely to 

prejudicially affect his functions as the President or a member. 

6. Procedure of appointment.—(1) The President and members of the State Commission and the District 
Commission shall be appointed by the State Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee, 
consisting of the following persons, namely: – 

(a)     Chief Justice of the High Court or any Judge of the High Court nominated by him-
Chairperson; 

(b)        Secretary in charge of Consumer Affairs of the State Government – Member;  

(c)         Nominee of the Chief Secretary of the State—Member.  

(2)     The Secretary in charge of Consumer Affairs of the State Government shall be the convener of the 
Selection   Committee. 

(3)    No appointment of the President, or of a member shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or 
absence in the Selection Committee other than a vacancy or absence of the Chairperson. 

(4)     The process of appointments shall be initiated by the State Government at least six months before the 
vacancy arises. 

(5)      If a post falls vacant due to resignation or death of a member or creation of a new post, the process 
for filling the post shall be initiated immediately after the post has fallen vacant or is created, as the 
case may be.  

(6)     The advertisement of a vacancy inviting applications for the posts from eligible candidates shall be 
published in leading newspapers and circulated in such other manner as the State Government may 
deem appropriate. 

(7)    After scrutiny of the applications received till the last date specified for receipt of such applications, a 
list of eligible candidates along with their applications shall be placed before the Selection 
Committee.  

(8)     The Selection Committee shall consider all the applications of eligible applicants referred to it and if 
it considers necessary, it may shortlist the applicants in accordance with such criteria as it may 
decide. 

(9)    The Selection Committee shall determine its procedure for making its recommendation keeping in 
view the requirements of the State Commission or the District Commission and after taking into 
account  the suitability, record of past performance, integrity  and  adjudicatory experience. 

(10)  The Selection committee shall recommend a panel of names of candidates for appointment in the 
order of merit for the consideration of the State Government. 

(11)  The State Government shall verify or cause to be verified the credentials and antecedents of the 
recommended candidates. 

(12)   Every appointment of a President or member shall be subject to submission of a certificate of 
physical fitness as indicated in the annexure appended to these rules, duly signed by a civil surgeon 
or District Medical Officer.   

(13)   Before appointment, the selected candidate shall furnish an undertaking that he does not and will not 
have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a President 
or member. 

7.  Resignation by  President or  Member of  State Commission or District Commission.—The President 
or any member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the State Government, resign his office at any 
time: 

                  Provided that the President or member shall, unless he is permitted by the State Government to 
relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of 
such notice or until a person duly appointed as a successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his 
term of office, whichever is the earliest. 

 8.   Removal of President or Member of State Commission or District Commission from office.—(1) The 
State Government shall remove from office any President or member, who— 

(a)      has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b)      has been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or 
(c)      has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such member; or 



 [भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का   रािपत्र : असाधारण  7 
(d)      has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his 

functions as a member; or 
(e)     has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public 

interest: 
        Provided that where a President or member is proposed to be removed on any ground specified in 

clauses (c) to (e), the President or member shall be informed of the charges against him and given an 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 

9.  Procedure for inquiry of misbehavior or incapacity of President or Member of State Commission or 
District Commission.—(1) If a written complaint is received by the State Government, alleging any definite 
charge of misbehavior or incapacity to perform the functions of the office in respect of the President or a 
Member of the State Commission or District Commission, the State Government shall make a preliminary 
scrutiny of such complaint. 

(2)  If on preliminary scrutiny, the State Government is of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for 
making an inquiry into the truth of any misbehavior or incapacity of the President or a Member of the State 
Commission or District Commission, it shall make a reference to the National Commission in the case of State 
Commission and to the State Commission in the case of District Commission to conduct the inquiry. 

(3)  The National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be,   shall complete the inquiry within 
three months or such further time as may be specified by the National Commission. 

(4)  After the conclusion of the inquiry, the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, 
shall submit its report to the State Government stating therein its findings and the reasons therefor on each of the 
charges separately with such observations on the whole case as it may think fit. 

(5)  The National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, shall not be bound by the procedure 
laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice and shall have power to regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of date, place and time of its 
inquiry. 

10. Term of office of President or Member.—The President and every member of the State Commission and 
the District Commission shall hold office for a term of four years or up to the age of sixty-five years, whichever 
is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of four years subject to the age limit of sixty-
five years, and such reappointment is made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee.  

[F. No. J-10/7/2018-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy.  

ANNEXURE 
 

[ See rule 6 (12)] 
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF PHYSICAL FITNESS 
 

I hereby certify that I have examined Shri/Smt./Ms…………………………………………….. and that I have 
not discovered that he/she has any disease ( communicable or otherwise) , constitutional weakness or bodily 
infirmity, except……………………………  I do not consider this a disqualification for his/her for employment 
as member in the State/District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission for a period of four years or up to 
the age of sixty five years, whichever is earlier. 
 
 
Date………. 
 
 
Signature of candidate 

Signature 
Designation 

(Civil Surgeon/District Medical Officer) 
 

 
 
 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 



रजजस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99                                                                                                                               REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 
  
 

 

xxxGIDHxxx 
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-xअxx.G-1ID6E0x7x2x 020-220545

CG-DL-E-16072020-220545

असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग II—खण्ड 3—उप-खण्ड  (i)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   347] नई ददल्ली,  बधुर्ार, जलुाई 15, 2020/ आषाढ़ 24, 1942  
No. 347] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY,  JULY 15, 2020/ASADHA 24, 1942  
 

उपभोक्ता मामल,े खाद्य और सार्जव जनक जर्तरण मतं्रालय  

(उपभोक्ता मामल ेजर्भाग)  

अजधसचूना 

नई ददल्ली, 15 जुलाई, 2020 

सा.का.जन. 451(अ).—कें द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) की धारा 102 की 
उपधारा (1) के परंतुक के अधीन प्रदत्त िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करते हुए जनम्नजलजखत जनयम बनाती ह,ै अथावत्: -  

1. सजंक्षप्त नाम और प्रारम्भ.— (1) इन जनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम उपभोक्ता संरक्षण (राज्य आयोग और जजला आयोग के 

अध्यक्ष और सदस्ट्यों का रे्तन, भते्त एरं् सेर्ा की ितें) मॉडल जनयम, 2020 ह।ै 

(2) ये 20 जुलाई, 2020  को प्ररृ्त्त होंगे। 

2. पररभाषाएं – (1) इन जनयमों म,ें  जब तक दक संदभव से अन्यथा अपेजक्षत न हो, - 

(क) ‘अजधजनयम’ से उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) ‘सदस्ट्य’ से जजला आयोग अथर्ा राज्य आयोग, जैसा भी मामला हो, का सदस्ट्य अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ग) ‘अध्यक्ष’ से जजला आयोग अथर्ा राज्य आयोग, जैसा भी मामला हो, का अध्यक्ष अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(घ) ‘राज्य सरकार’ में जनयम 13 के जसर्ाय संजर्धान के अनुच्छेद 239 के अधीन जनयुक्त दकसी संघ राज्य 
क्षेत्र का प्रिासक सजम्मजलत ह।ै  

(2) उन िब्दों और पदों के, जो इसमें प्रयुक्त ह,ैं  और पररभाजषत नहीं ह ैककत ुअजधजनयम म ें पररभाजषत ह,ै र्ही 
अथ व होंगे, जो उस अजधजनयम म ें ह।ैं  

3148 GI/2020 (1) 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

3.  जजला आयोग के अध्यक्ष एर् ंसदस्ट्यों को दये र्तेन एर् ंभत्त-े (1) अध्यक्ष ऐसे रे्तन और भत्तों का हकदार होगा, जो 

दकसी जजला न्यायाधीि को अजतकाल रे्तनमान म ें अनजु्ञेय ह।ै  

(2)   सदस्ट्य, राज्य सरकार के दकसी उप सजचर् के रे्तनमान के न्यनूतम स्ट्तर के रे्तन तथा उस अजधकारी को अनुज्ञेय अन्य 

भत्तों के बराबर रे्तन प्राप्त करेगा।  

(3)   अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य के रूप में जनयुक्त दकया गया कोई ऐसा व्यजक्त, जो पेंिनभोगी ह,ै के रे्तन में उसके द्वारा 

आहररत पेंिन की सकल राजि की कटौती की जाएगी। 

(4)    अध्यक्ष और सदस्ट्य के रे्तन म ें 3% की दर से र्ार्षषक उत्तरोत्तर रृ्जि की जाएगी।   

4. राज्य आयोग के अध्यक्ष एर् ंसदस्ट्यों को दये र्तेन एर् ंभत्त-े(1) राज्य आयोग का अध्यक्ष, राज्य के उच्च न्यायालय के 

पीठासीन न्यायाधीि को अनुज्ञये र्ेतन और अन्य भते्त प्राप्त करेगा।   

(2) राज्य आयोग का सदस्ट्य, राज्य सरकार के अपर सजचर् के रे्तनमान के न्यनूतम स्ट्तर के रे्तन तथा उस अजधकारी 
को अनुमेय अन्य भत्तों के बराबर रे्तन प्राप्त करेगा।  

(3)    अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य के रूप में जनयकु्त दकया गया कोई ऐसा व्यजक्त, जो पेंिनभोगी ह,ै के रे्तन में उसके द्वारा 

आहररत पेंिन की सकल राजि की कटौती की जाएगी।  

(4)  सदस्ट्य के रे्तन म ें 3% की दर से र्ार्षषक उत्तरोत्तर रृ्जि की जाएगी।   

5. जचदकत्सक दषृ्टया योग्यता- दकसी भी व्यजक्त को तब तक अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य के रूप म ें जनयुजक्त नहीं दकया जाएगा जब 

तक दक उसे राज्य सरकार द्वारा इस जनजमत्त जर्जनर्ददष्ट दकए गए दकसी प्राजधकारी द्वारा जचदकत्सीय रूप से स्ट्र्स्ट्थ घोजषत 
नहीं दकया जाता। 

6. आकजस्ट्मक ररजक्त - राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जजला आयोग, जैसा भी मामला हो, म ें अध्यक्ष के पद पर आकजस्ट्मक ररजक्त के 

मामले में, राज्य सरकार को ज्येष्ठतम सदस्ट्य को अध्यक्ष के रूप में कायव करन ेके जलए जनयकु्त करने का अजधकार होगा।  

7. मकान दकराया भत्ता - अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य, तत्स्ट्थानी प्राजस्ट्थजत के राज्य सरकार के समूह ‘क’ के अजधकारी को अनजु्ञेय 

दर के समान दर पर मकान दकराया भत्ता का हकदार होगा। 

8.पररर्हन भत्ता — अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य, तत्स्ट्थानी प्राजस्ट्थजत के राज्य सरकार के समूह ‘क’ के अजधकारी को अनुज्ञेय दर 

के समान दर पर पररर्हन भत्ता का हकदार होगा। 

9.   छुट्टी और जचदकत्सा उपचार तथा अस्ट्पताल सजुर्धाएं – राज्य आयोग और जजला आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सदस्ट्य राज्य 

सरकार के समूह ‘क’ के सरकारी कमवचारी पर लाग ूउपबंधों के अनुसार छुट्टी, छुट्टी यात्रा ररयायत, जचदकत्सा उपचार और 
अस्ट्पताल सुजर्धाओं के हकदार होंगे।  

10. जर्त्तीय एर् ंअन्य लाभों की घोषणा — अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य, अपना पद ग्रहण करन ेसे पहले, अपनी आजस्ट्तयों, और 

अपन ेदाजयत्र्ों तथा जर्त्तीय और अन्य लाभों की घोषणा करेगा। 

11. सरे्ा की अन्य ित ें — (1) अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य की सेर्ा के जनबंधन और ित,ें  जजनके संबंध में इन जनयमों में कोई स्ट्पष्ट 

उपबंध नहीं दकया गया ह,ै र्हीं होगी जो तत्स्ट्थानी प्राजस्ट्थजत के राज्य सरकार के समूह ‘क’ के अजधकारी को अनजु्ञेय ह।ै 

(2)   अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जजला आयोग, जैसा भी मामला हो, से सेर्ाजनरृ्त्त होने के पश् चात् राष्ट्रीय 

आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जजला आयोग म ें र्कालत नहीं करेगा। 

(3)   अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जजला आयोग, जैसा भी मामला हो, में इन क्षमताओं में कायव करते समय 

दकसी प्रकार का मध्यस्ट्थता कायव नहीं करेगा। 

 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  3 

(4)   राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जजला आयोग, जैसा भी मामला हो, का अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य उस तारीख से जजससे रे् पद पर 

नहीं रह जात ेह,ैं  दो र्षों की अर्जध तक दकसी भी ऐसे व्यजक्त के प्रबंधन अथर्ा प्रिासन में अथर्ा उससे संबंजधत 
दकसी भी रोजगार को स्ट्र्ीकार नहीं करेगा जो राज्य आयोग अथर्ा जजला आयोग के समक्ष दकसी कायवर्ाही में कोई 
पक्षकार रहा हो,  

परंतु इन जनयमों में अतंर्षर्ष्ट कोई बात, कें द्रीय सरकार अथर्ा दकसी राज्य सरकार अथर्ा दकसी स्ट्थानीय 
प्राजधकारी अथर्ा दकसी कानूनी प्राजधकारी या दकसी कें द्रीय, राज्य या प्रांतीय अजधजनयम के अधीन स्ट्थाजपत दकसी जनगम 
अथर्ा कंपनी अजधजनयम, 2013 (2013 का 18) की धारा 2 के खंड (45) में यथाजर्जनर्ददष्ट दकसी सरकारी कंपनी के 
अधीन दकसी जनयोजन पर लाग ूनहीं होगी। 

12. पद और गोपनीयता की िपथ — अध्यक्ष अथर्ा सदस्ट्य जनयुक्त दकय ेजाने र्ाला प्रत्येक व्यजक्त, अपना पद ग्रहण करन े

से पहले, इन जनयमों के साथ संलग्न प्ररूप 1 में दी गई पद की िपथ तथा प्ररूप 2  म ें दी गई गोपनीयता की िपथ ग्रहण 

करेगा तथा उन पर हस्ट्ताक्षर करेगा। 

13. रे्तन, पाररश्रजमक और अन्य भत्तों की अदायगी राज्य सरकार की संजचत जनजध से और संघ राज्य क्षेत्र के मामल ेम ें

भारत की संजचत जनजध से की जाएगी। 

14. जजला आयोग और राज्य आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सदस्ट्यों की सेर्ा के जनबंधन और ितों म ें उनकी पदार्जध के दौरान 

अलाभकारी पररर्तवन नहीं दकया जाएगा।  

[फा. सं. जे-10/8/2018-सीपीय]ू 

अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर्  

अनलुग्नक 

[जनयम 12 देख]ें  

                                                                          प्ररूप I 

राज्य आयोग और जजला आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सदस्ट्य के जलए पद की िपथ का प्ररूप  

मैं, क, ख    , राज्य उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाद प्रजततोष आयोग, .............../ जजला उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाद प्रजततोष 
आयोग,.................. का अध्यक्ष/सदस्ट्य के रूप में जनयकु्त दकए जाने पर, सत्यजनष्ठा से प्रजतज्ञान करता ह/ंईश्वर के नाम म ें
िपथ लेता ह ंदक मैं अपनी सर्ोत्तम क्षमता, ज्ञान और जर्रे्कबुजि से राज्य आयोग/जजला आयोग के अध्यक्ष/सदस्ट्य  के रूप 
में अपने कत्तवव्यों का जनष्ठापूर्वक और ईमानदारी से जनर्वहन करंूगा तथा दकसी भय अथर्ा पक्षपात, राग अथर्ा द्वषे के जबना 
जनणवय दगंू ा तथा म ैं संजर्धान और देि की जर्जध की रक्षा करंूगा। 

(                                  ) 

प्ररूप II 

राज्य आयोग और जजला आयोग के अध्यक्ष और सदस्ट्य के जलए गोपनीयता की िपथ का प्ररूप  

मैं, क,ख   , राज्य उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाद प्रजततोष आयोग, .............../ जजला उपभोक्ता जर्र्ाद प्रजततोष आयोग,.................. 
का अध्यक्ष/सदस्ट्य के रूप में जनयुक्त दकए जाने पर, सत्यजनष्ठा से प्रजतज्ञान करता ह/ंईश्वर के नाम में िपथ लतेा ह ंदक मैं, 
अध्यक्ष/सदस्ट्य के रूप म ें मरेे कत्तवव्यों के उजचत जनर्वहन के जलए यथाअपेजक्षत के जसर्ाय, मरेे जर्चाराधीन प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए 
अथर्ा राज्य आयोग/जजला आयोग के अध्यक्ष/सदस्ट्य के रूप में मुझ े ज्ञात हुए, दकसी मामले को दकसी व्यजक्त अथर्ा 
व्यजक्तयों को प्रत्यक्ष अथर्ा अप्रत्यक्ष रूप से संसूजचत अथर्ा प्रकट नहीं करंूगा।    

(                                  ) 

                    

 

                                                                                                       



4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 

( Department of Consumer Affairs) 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15th July, 2020 

G.S.R. 451 (E).––In exercise of the powers conferred under proviso to sub-section (1) of section 102 of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely: - 

1. Short title and commencement. — (1) These rules may be called the Consumer Protection (Salary, 
allowances and conditions of service of President and Members of the State Commission and District 
Commission) Model Rules, 2020. 
(2) th

They shall come into force on the 20  day of July, 2020. 

2.      Definitions. --- (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 

(a)   ‘Act’ means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019); 

(b)  ‘Member’ means a Member of the District Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be; 

(c) ‘President’ means the President of the District Commission  or the State Commission, as the case may be; 

(d) ‘State Government’ includes an administrator of a Union territory appointed under article 239 of the 
Constitution except in rule 13.  

(2)   The words and expressions used herein and not defined and defined in the Act shall have the same meaning 
respectively assigned to them in the Act. 

3.      Salaries and allowances payable to President and members of District Commission. – (1) The President 
shall be entitled to the salary and allowances as are admissible to a District Judge in the super time scale of pay. 

(2)    A Member shall receive a pay equal to the pay at the minimum of the scale of pay of a Deputy Secretary of the 
State Government and other allowances as admissible to such officer.  

(3)   The pay of a person appointed as President or member, who is in receipt of any pension, shall be reduced by the 
gross amount of pension drawn by him. 
(4)  There shall be an annual upward revision of the pay  of the President and member at the rate of 3%. 
4. Salaries and allowances payable to President and members of the State Commission.--- (1) President of the 
State Commission shall receive the salary and other allowances as are admissible to a sitting judge of the High Court 
of the State.   

(2) A  Member of the State Commission shall receive a pay equivalent to the pay at minimum of the scale of pay of 
an Additional Secretary of the State Government and other allowances as are admissible to such officer.  

(3)  The pay of a person appointed as President or member, who is in receipt of any pension, shall be reduced by the 
gross amount of pension drawn by him.  

(4)  There shall be an annual upward revision of the pay of a member at the rate of 3%. 

5. Medical fitness.—No person shall be appointed as President or Member unless he is declared medically fit by an 
authority specified by the State Government in this behalf. 

6. Casual vacancy.— In case of a casual vacancy in the office of President in the State Commission or District 
Commission, as the case may be, the State Government shall have the power to appoint the senior most Member to 
officiate as President.  

7. House rent allowance.—The President or member shall be entitled to  house rent allowance at the same rate as are 
admissible to Group ‘A’ Officer of the State Government of a corresponding status. 

8. Transport allowance.—The President or member shall be entitled to transport allowance at the same rate as are 
admissible to Group ‘A’ Officer of the State Government of a corresponding status. 

9. Leave and medical treatment and hospital facilities.—The President and members of the State Commission and 
the District Commission  shall be entitled to leave, Leave Travel Concession, medical treatment and hospital 
facilities as per the provisions applicable to Group A Government servants in the State  Government. 

10. Declaration of Financial and other Interests.—The President or member shall, before entering upon his office, 
declare his assets, and his liabilities and financial and other interests. 

 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  5 

11. Other conditions of service.—(1) The terms and conditions of service of the President or member with respect to 
which no express provision has been made in these rules, shall be such as are admissible to a Group ‘A’ Officer of the 
State Government of a corresponding status. 

(2) The President or member shall not practice before the National Commission, the State Commission or the District 
Commission after retirement from the service of the State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may 
be. 

(3) The President or member shall not undertake any arbitration work while functioning in these capacities in the 
State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may be. 

(4) The President or member of the State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall not, for a 
period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any employment in, or connected with 
the management or administration of, any person who has been a party to a proceeding before the State Commission 
or the District Commission: 

Provided that nothing contained in this rule shall apply to any employment under the Central Government or 
a State Government or a local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation established by or under any 
Central, State or Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013). 

12. Oaths of office and secrecy.—Every person appointed to be the President   or member shall, before entering 
upon his office, make and subscribe an oath of office in Form I and oath of secrecy in Form II annexed to these rules. 

13. The salary, remuneration and other allowances shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of the State 
Government and in the case of the Union Territories, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

14. The terms and conditions of the service of the President and the members of the District Commission and the State 
Commission shall not be varied to their disadvantage during their tenure of office. 

[F.No.J-10/8/2018-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy. 

Annexure 

[See Rule 12] 

FORM I 

Form of Oath of Office for the President and Member of the State Commission and District Commission 

I, A. B., having been appointed as the President/ Member in the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
……../ District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, …………..do solemnly affirm/do swear in the name of 
God that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as the President/Member of the  State 
Commission/District Commission  to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment, without fear or favour, 
affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws of land. 

(                                  ) 

 

FORM II 

Form of Oath of Secrecy for the President and Member of the State Commission and District Commission 

I, A. B., having been appointed as the President/Member of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
…………./ District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, …… do solemnly affirm/do swear in the name of 
God that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be 
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as President/Member of  the State Commission/District 
Commission  except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as the President/Member.  

(                               )  

 

 

 

 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 



रजिस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99                                                                                                                               REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 

  
 

 

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-xxxGIDHxxx 
xअxx.G-1ID6E0x7x2x 020-220548

CG-DL-E-16072020-220548

असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग II—खण्ड 3—उप-खण्ड  (i)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   346] नई ददल्ली,  बधुर्ार, िलुाई 15, 2020/आषाढ़ 24, 1942  
No. 346] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY,  JULY 15, 2020/ASHADHA 24, 1942  

 

उपभोक्ता मामल,े खाद्य और सार्िव जनक जर्तरण मतं्रालय 

(उपभोक्ता मामल ेजर्भाग) 

अजधसचूना 

नई ददल्ली, 15 िुलाई, 2020 

सा.का.जन. 450(अ).—कें द्रीय सरकार, उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) की धारा 101 की 
उप-धारा (1) तथा उप-धारा (2) के खंड (द) और (य च) द्वारा प्रदत्त िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करते हुए, जनम्नजलजखत जनयम 
बनाती ह,ैं  अथावत ्:- 

1. सजंक्षप्त नाम और प्रारम्भ.—(1) इन जनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम उपभोक्ता संरक्षण (मध्यस्ट्थता) जनयम, 2020 ह।ै 

(2)  ये   20 िुलाई, 2020   को प्ररृ्त्त होंगे। 

2. पररभाषाए.ं—(1) इन जनयमों में, िब तक दक संदभव अन्यथा अपेजक्षत न हो, - 

(क) ‘अजधजनयम’ से उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) ‘आयोग’ से जिला आयोग, राज्य आयोग अथर्ा राष्ट्रीय आयोग, िैसा भी मामला हो, अजभप्रेत ह;ैं  

(ग) ‘मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ’ से धारा 74 के प्रार्धानों के अनुसरण म ें स्ट्थाजपत उपभोक्ता मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ अजभप्रेत ह;ै  

(घ) ‘पैनल’ से धारा 75 की उप-धारा (1) के अधीन आयोग द्वारा तयैार दकया गया मध्यस्ट्थों का पनैल अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ङ) ‘पक्षकारों’ से जर्र्ाद से संबंजधत कोई पक्षकार अजभप्रेत ह;ै  

(च) ‘समझौता’ से मध्यस्ट्थता की कारवर्ाई से प्राप्त समझौता अजभप्रेत ह;ै 

3147 GI/2020 (1) 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

    (2) इन जनयमों में उपयोग दकए गए ऐसे सभी अन्य िब्द और र्ाकयांि, जिन्ह ें इनमें पररभाजषत नहीं दकया गया ह ैपरंत ु

उपभोक्ता संरक्षण अजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) में पररभाजषत दकया गया ह,ै का र्ही अथव होगा िैसा दक उस 

अजधजनयम म ें पररभाजषत दकया गया हो। 

3. मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ -  (1) दकसी आयोग में स्ट्थाजपत दकये गये प्रयेयेक मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ में चयन सजमजत, जिसमें उस 

आयोग का अध्यक्ष एरं् सदस्ट्य सजम्मजलत होंगे, की अनुिंसा के अनुसार मध्यस्ट्थों का एक पैनल होगा। 

(2) मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ म ें उतनी संख्या में सहायक कमवचारी होंगे, िो उस आयोग के अध्यक्ष द्वारा संबंजधत सरकार के साथ 

परामि व से जनधावररत दकए िाएं तथा र्ह सरकार आयोग द्वारा अपेजक्षत सभी प्रिासजनक सहायता एरं् अर्संरचनायेमक 

सुजर्धाएं उपलब्ध कराएगी।  

4.  ऐस े मामल े जिन्ह ें मध्यस्ट्थता के जलए जनर्ददष्ट नहीं दकया िाएगा – जनम्नजलजखत मामलों को मध्यस्ट्थता के जलए 

जनर्ददष् ट नहीं दकया िाएगा, अथावत्:- 

(क) जचदकयेसा लापरर्ाही के संबंध में कायवर्ाही से संबंजधत मामले जिनके पररणामस्ट्र्रूप घोर क्षजत अथर्ा मृयेयु 

हुई हो; 

(ख) ऐसे मामले िो चूक अथर्ा अपराध से संबंजधत हो तथा जिनके जलए दकसी एक अथर्ा एक से अजधक पक्षकारों 

द्वारा अपराधों को िमनीय बनाने के जलए आरे्दन दकया गया हो; 

(ग) ऐसे मामले जिनमें धोखाधडी, िाली दस्ट्तारे्ि बनान,े कूटरचना, प्रजतरूपण, प्रपीणन के गम्भीर और जर्जिष्ट 

आरोप िाजमल हों; 

(घ) अपराजधयों के अजभयोिन और गैर-िमनीय अपराधों से संबंजधत मामल;े 

(ङ) ऐसे मामले जिनमें लोक जहत अथर्ा ऐसे बहुत अजधक व्यजक्तयों, िो आयोग के समक्ष पक्षकार नहीं ह,ैं  के जहत 

सजम्मजलत हो;  

      परंतु यह दक इस जनयम में उजल्लजखत दकए गए मामलों के अलार्ा दकसी अन्य मामले के संबंध में, उस आयोग, जिसके 
समक्ष मामला लंजबत ह,ै को यदद यह प्रतीत होता ह ै दक समाधान का ऐसा कोई तयेर् मौिूद नहीं हो िो पक्षकारों को 
स्ट्र्ीकायव हो अथर्ा मामल ेकी पररजस्ट्थजतयों तथा पक्षकारों की संबंजधत जस्ट्थजतयों के मदे्दनिर मध्यस्ट्थता अन्यथा उपयकु्त 
नहीं ह,ै तो आयोग इस मामल ेको मध्यस्ट्थता के जलए अग्रेजषत न करने का जर्कल्प चुन सकता ह।ै   

5. िलु्क की र्ाजपसी – िहां आयोग पक्षकारों को मध्यस्ट्थता के जलए संदर्भभत करता ह,ै तो जिकायतकताव, यदद उन 

पक्षकारों के बीच समाधान हो िाता ह,ै उस जिकायत के संबंध में भुगतान दकए गए आरे्दन िलु्क की सम्पणूव राजि प्राप्त 

करने का हकदार होगा। 

6. जर्र्ाचन अथर्ा न्याजयक कायर्व ाही की सहायता लनेा – कोई भी पक्षकार ऐसे दकसी मामल,े िो मध्यस्ट्थता के अधीन 

ह,ै के संबंध में कोई जर्र्ाचन अथर्ा न्याजयक कायवर्ाही आरम्भ नहीं करेंगे तथा िब ऐसे पक्षकारों ने ऐसी कोई कायवर्ाही 

आरम्भ न करने के जलए सोच-समझकर र्चनपत्र भी ददया हो।  

7. समाधान समझौता को उसस ेसबंजंधत पक्षकार की मयृेय ु के मामल ेम ें बखास्ट्व त न दकया िाना – (1) कोई समाधान 

समझौता उससे संबंजधत दकसी भी पक्षकार की मृयेयु के मामल ेमें बखावस्ट्त नहीं दकया िाएगा तथा मृतक पक्षकार के जर्जधक 

प्रजतजनजध द्वारा अथर्ा उसके जर्रूद्ध प्रर्तवनीय होगा।   

(2) इस जनयम की कोई भी बात दकसी ऐसी जर्जध के प्रर्तनव  पर प्रभार् नहीं डालेगी जिसके आधार पर दकसी कारवर्ाई 

का कोई अजधकार दकसी व्यजक्त की मृयेयु के कारण जनर्ावजपत हो िाता ह।ै 

[फा. सं. िे-10/2/2020-सीपीय]ू 

अजमत मेहता, संयुक्त सजचर् 

 



[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  3 

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 

(Department of Consumer Affairs) 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 15th July, 2020 

G.S.R. 450(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and clauses (r) and  (zf)  of  
sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central Government 
hereby makes the following rules, namely:— 

1. Short title and commencement.—(1) These rules may be called the Consumer Protection 
(Mediation) Rules, 2020. 

th
(2) They shall come into force on the 20  day of July, 2020. 

2.  Definitions—(1) ln these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,— 

(a) "Act" means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019); 

(b)  “Commission” means District Commission, State Commission or National Commission, as 
the case may be; 

(c) “mediation cell” means a consumer mediation cell established in accordance with the 
provisions of  section 74; 

(d) “panel” means a panel of mediators prepared by the Commission under sub-section (1) of 
section 75; 

(e)  “Parties” means parties to a dispute; 

(f) “Settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of mediation.  

(2)  All other words and expressions used in the rules and not defined but defined in the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. 

3. Mediation Cell.---(1) Every Mediation Cell set up in a Commission, shall have a panel of mediators    
on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of the President and a member of that 
Commission. 

(2) The Mediation Cell shall have such support staff as may be decided by the President of 
that Commission in consultation with the concerned Government and that Government shall provide 
all administrative assistance and infrastructure facilities required by the Commission 

4.  Matters not to be referred to mediation.---The following matters shall not be referred 
to mediation, namely:— 

(a) the matters relating to proceedings in respect of medical negligence resulting in grievous injury 
or death; 

(b) matters which relate to defaults or offences for which applications for compounding of offences 
have been made by one or more parties; 

(c) cases involving serious and specific allegations of fraud, fabrication of documents, forgery, 
impersonation, coercion; 

(d) cases relating to prosecution for criminal and non-compoundable offences; 

(e) cases which involve public interest or the interest of numerous persons who are not parties 
before the Commission:  

Provided that, in any case other than those mentioned in this rule, the Commission before 
which the case is pending may choose not to refer it to mediation if it appears to the 
Commission that no elements of a settlement exist which may be acceptable to the parties or that 
mediation is otherwise not appropriate having regard to the circumstances of the case and the 
respective positions of the parties. 

 



4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 

5. Refund of fee.—Where the Commission refers the parties to mediation, the complainant shall be 
entitled to receive full amount of application fee paid in respect of such complaint, if a settlement 
is reached between such parties. 

6.   Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings.—The parties shall not initiate any arbitral or judicial 
proceedings in respect of a matter which  is the subject-matter of the mediation and also when 
such  parties have expressly undertaken not to initiate any such proceeding.  

7.  Settlement agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto.—(1) A settlement 
agreement shall not be discharged by the death of any party thereto and shall be enforceable by or 
against the legal representative of the deceased party.  

(2) Nothing in this rule shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of which any right of action is 
extinguished by the death of a person. 

[F. No. J-10/2/2020-CPU] 

AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 



रजजस्ट्री स.ं डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 

  
 

 

सी.जी.-डी.एलxxxGIDHxxx 
xx.x-GअI.D-E2x4x0x 72020-220668

CG-DL-E-24072020-220668

ऄसाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 

भाग III—खण्ड 4  
PART III—Section 4 

प्राजधकार स ेप्रकाजित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 

स.ं   281] नइ ददल्ली,  िकु्रिार, जलुाइ 24, 2020/श्रािण 2, 1942  
No. 281] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY,  JULY 24, 2020/SRAVANA 2, 1942  

 

राष्ट्रीय ईपभोक्ता जििाद प्रजततोष अयोग 

ऄजधसचूना 

नइ ददल् ली, 24 जुलाइ, 2020 

 फा.स.ं ए-105/एम.अर./एन.सी.डी.अर.सी./2020.—राष्ट्रीय ईपभोक्ता जििाद प्रजततोष अयोग, कें द्रीय सरकार 

के पूिविती ऄनुमोदन से, ईपभोक्ता संरक्षण ऄजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) की धारा 103 द्वारा प्रदत्त िजक्तयों का 

प्रयोग करते हुए जनम्नजलजखत जिजनयम बनाता ह:ै- 

1. सजंक्षप्त नाम और प्रारंभ – (1) आन जिजनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम ईपभोक्ता संरक्षण (मध्यकता) जिजनयमन, 2020 ह।ै 

(2) ये राजपत्र म ें प्रकािन की तारीख को प्रिृत्त होंगे। 

2. पररभाषाए ं– (1) आन जनयमों म,ें  जब तक दक संदभव से ऄन्यथा ऄपेजक्षत न हो- 

(क) “ ऄजधजनयम ” से ईपभोक्ता संरक्षण ऄजधजनयम, 2019 (2019 का 35) ऄजभप्रेत ह;ै 

(ख) “ ईपभोक्ता अयोग” से ऄजधजनयम की धारा 28 के तहत जजला म ें स्ट्थाजपत जजला ईपभोक्ता जििाद 

प्रजततोष अयोग, ऄजधजनयम की धारा 42 के तहत दकसी राज्य में स्ट्थाजपत राज्य ईपभोक्ता जििाद 

प्रजततोष अयोग या ऄजधजनयम की धारा 53 के तहत स्ट्थाजपत राष्ट्रीय ईपभोक्ता जििाद प्रजततोष अयोग 

ऄजभप्रेत ह।ै 

(ग) “ मध्यकता प्रकोष्ठ” से धारा 74 की ईप-धारा (1) के ऄधीन स्ट्थाजपत ईपभोक्ता मध्यकता प्रकोष्ठ ऄजभप्रेत 

ह ैऔर आनम ें राष्ट्रीय अयोग की प्रादेजिक न्यायपीठों से संबद्ध ईपभोक्ता मध्यकता प्रकोष्ठ सजममजलत ह;ैं   

3267 GI/2020 (1) 



2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART III—SEC. 4] 

(घ) “ पक्षकार” से ईपभोक्ता जििाद ऄथिा ईपभोक्ता अयोग के पास लंजबत ऄन्य कायविाजहयों से संबंजधत 

पक्षकार ऄजभप्रते ह।ै 

(ङ) “ जनयम ” से ऄजधजनयम के तहत बनाए गए जनयम ऄजभप्रते ह।ै 

(च) “ धारा ” से ऄजधजनयम की धारा ऄजभप्रेत ह।ै 

(छ) ‘व्यिस्ट्थापन’ से ईपभोक्ता अयोग के समक्ष लंजबत ईपभोक्ता जििादों म ें िाजमल सभी ऄथिा कजतपय मुद्दों 

के संबंध म ें मध्यस्ट्थता की कारविाइ से प्राप्त व्यिस्ट्थापन ऄजभप्रते ह;ै 

(ज) ईन िब्दों और पदों के, जो आसम ें प्रयकु्त ह ैं और पररभाजषत नहीं ककत ुयथाजस्ट्थजत ऄजधजनयम या जनयम म ें

ह,ै िही ऄथ व होंगे। 

3. मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें पनैलबद्ध होन ेके जलए पात्रता- (1) जनम्नजलजखत व्यजक्त मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ म ें पैनलबद्ध होने के पात्र 

होंगे- 

(i) भारत के ईच्चतम न्यायलय के सेिाजनिृत्त न्यायाधीि, 

(ii) ईच्च न्यायालयों के सेिाजनिृत्त न्यायाधीि, 

(iii) ईपभोक्ता अयोग के सेिाजनिृत्त सदस्ट्य; 

(iv) सेिाजनिृत्त जजला एिं सत्र न्यायाधीि, सेिाजनिृत्त ऄजतररक्त जजला एिं सत्र न्यायाधीि और राज्य के ईच्च 

न्याजयक सेिाओं के ऄन्य सेिाजनिृत्त सदस्ट्य; 

(v) दस िषों से ऄजधक ऄनुभि रखने िाल ेसेिाजनिृत्त न्याजयक ऄजधकारी; 

(vi) िकालत म ें न्यूनतम दस िष व का ऄनुभि रखन ेिाले ऄजधिक्ता; 

(vii) भारत के ईच्चतम न्यायालय, ईच्च न्यायालय ऄथिा जजला न्यायालय के मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ म ें पैनलबद्ध 

मध्यस्ट्थ। 

(viii) मध्यकता/सुलह म ें न्यूनतम पांच िषों का ऄनुभि रखन ेिाला कोइ व्यजक्त। 

(ix) न्यूनतम पंद्रह िषों का ऄनुभि रखने िाले जििेषज्ञ या ऄन्य व्यािृजतक ऄथिा सेिाजनिृत्त िररष्ठ ऄजधकारी 

या सेिाजनिृत्त ऄजधकारी। 

4. पनैलबद्ध के जलए जनरहतव ा- (1) जनम्नजलजखत व्यजक्त मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें पैनलबद्ध होन ेके जलए ऄनह व मान ेजाएंग,े 

ऄथावत ्–  

(i) ऐसा व्यजक्त जजसे ददिाजलया के रूप म ें न्यायजनणीत घोजषत दकया गया हो; 

(ii) ऐसा व्यजक्त जजसके जिरूद्ध दकसी दंड न्यायालय द्वारा ऐसे अपराजधक अरोप जजसमें नैजतक ऄधमता 

िाजमल हो, लगाए गए हों और लंजबत पडे हों; 

(iii) ऐसा व्यजक्त, जजसे दकसी ऄपराध के जलए दडं न्यायालय द्वारा नैजतक ऄधमता ऄतंर्ग्वस्ट्त हते ुजसद्धदोष 

ठहराया गया ह;ै 

(iv) ऐसा व्यजक्त जजसके जिरुद्ध समुजचत ऄनुिाजसक प्राजधकारी द्वारा ऄनुिासनात्मक कायविाही अरंभ की 

गइ हो और लंजबत हो ऄथिा दण्ड ददया गया हो। 

(2) ऐसा व्यजक्त, जो ईपभोक्ता जििाद के जिषय म ें जहतबद्ध रखता हो ऄथिा ईससे संबंजधत हो ऄथिा जो िृजतक 

क्षमता सजहत दकसी भी रीजत म ें ईपभोक्ता जििाद म ें दकसी भी पक्ष या ईसके दकसी सहभागी, सहयोगी, 



[भाग III—खण् ड 4] भारत का राजपत्र : ऄसाधारण 3 

प्रोमोटरों, मूल कंपनी, ऄनुषगंी कंपनी, भागीदारों, जनदेिकों या कमवचारी आत्यादद से संबंजधत हो ऄथिा 

संबद्ध हो ऄथिा से जुडा हुअ हो, तो आस मामल ेमें मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें नामजनर्ददष्ट होने के जलए ऄनह व होगा। 

5. मध्यस्ट्थ को पनैलबद्ध करन ेकी प्रदक्रया- (1) प्रत्येक ईपभोक्ता अयोग कम से कम एक ऄरं्ग्ेजी तथा ऄपन ेऄजधकार-के्षत्र 

म ें एक स्ट्थानीय समाचारपत्र में एक नोरटस के प्रकािन द्वारा मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें पैनलबद्ध करन ेके जलए पात्र व्यजक्तयों 
से अिेदन अमंजत्रत करेगा। 

(2) मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें पनैलबद्ध करने हतेु मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ म ें प्राप्त अिेदनों की संिीक्षा की जाएगी तथा धारा 

75 के ईप-घारा (1) के तहत गरठत चयन सजमजत के समक्ष पात्र अिेदनों को प्रस्ट्ततु दकया जाएगा। 

(3) चयन सजमजत ईसकी जसफाररि और ईपयकु्तता, ऄखंडता और ऄभ्यर्थथयों के सुसंगत ऄनभुि को ध्यान म ें

रखने के बाद एक पैनल, जजसे ईपभोक्ता मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ द्वारा ऄनरुजक्षत दकया जाएगा, की जसफाररि 

करेगी।  

(4) मध्यस्ट्थता पैनल म ें ईपभोक्ता अयोग से जुडे मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठों म ें आन व्यजक्तयों की संख्या ईपभोक्ता अयोग 

के ऄध्यक्ष द्वारा जनधावररत संख्या से ऄजधक नहीं होगी। 

(5) पैनल म ें िाजमल व्यजक्तयों की सहमजत ईन्ह ें पनैलबद्ध दकए जान ेसे पूिव ऄजभप्राप्त करनी होगा। 

(6) मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ की ऄध्यक्षता ईपभोक्ता अयोग के ऄध्यक्ष द्वारा की जाएगी। 

6. मध्यस्ट्थ को हटाना – यदद कोइ मध्यस्ट्थ ऄनह व पाया जाता ह ैऄथिा मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें दकसी प्रकार से कदाचार करता 

ह ैऄथिा मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें काम करने के जलए ऄनुपयकु्त पाया जाता ह,ै मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ ईसकी बात सुने जाने का 

एक ऄिसर प्रदान करने के पश्चात मध्यस्ट्थ पैनल से ईसका नाम हटा सकता ह।ै 

7. मध्यस्ट्थों को पनु: पनैलबद्ध करना- पुनः पैनलबद्ध दकए जाने हते ु केिल िही सदस्ट्य पात्र होंग े जजन्होंने पनैलबद्ध 

मध्यस्ट्थ के रुप म ें ऄपन ेकायों का सफलतापूिवक तथा जनपणुता से जनष्पादन दकया हो और पनु:पैनलबद्ध करके चयन 
सजमजत की जसफाररि के अधार पर दकया जाएगा। 

8. मध्यस्ट्थों का फीस- (1) ऐसे मध्यस्ट्थ,जो मामले के ईसे संदर्थभत दकए जाने से ईसके जनष्कषव तक, मध्यस्ट्थता की 

कायविाही का संचालन करता ह,ै को सफल मध्यस्ट्थता के जलए एक समेदकत फीस का भुगतान दकया जाएगा।  

(2) संबंजधत ईपभोक्ता अयोग के ऄध्यक्ष द्वारा, मामल-ेिार, जििाद की प्रिृजत्त को ध्यान में रखते हुए जलजपकीय 

सहायता और ऄन्य सहायक व्यय लागतों सजहत ईपभोक्ता अयोग म ें पैनलबद्ध मध्यस्ट्थ के फीस का जनधावरण 
दकया जाएगा। 

(3) ऄसफल मध्यस्ट्थता के मामले म ें मध्यस्ट्थ को ईपरोक्त फीस की अधी फीस का संदत्त दकया जाएगा। 

(4) मध्यस्ट्थ का फीस दोनो पक्षकारों द्वारा समान रूप से साझा दकया जाएगा। 

(5) ऐसा मध्यस्ट्थ, दकसी कायविाही के भाग का सफल संचालन करता ह,ै को ईपभोक्ता अयोग के ऄध्यक्ष द्वारा 

जनयत फीस का भुगतान दकया जाएगा। 

(6) मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ म ें फीस का ऄजर्ग्म जमा दकया जाएगा। 

(7) यदद कोइ पक्षकार फीस और/ या मध्यस्ट्थता की लागत का ऄपना भाग जमा नहीं करता, ईपभोक्ता अयोग 

मध्यस्ट्थ या दकसी ऄन्य पक्षकार के अिेदन पर चूक पर पक्षकार को आसे एक सप्ताह के भीतर जमा करन ेका 
जनदेि दे सकता ह ैऔर यदद  

(i) िह यह फीस और/ ऄथिा लागत को जमा करन े म ें ऄसफल रहता ह,ै तो ईपभोक्ता अयोग ऄन्य 

पक्षकारों को आसे जमा करने की ऄनुज्ञा दे सकता ह ैऔर जसजिल न्यायालय द्वारा धन संबंधी जडक्री के 

जनष्पादन के जलए जनधावररत रीजत से चूककता व पक्षकारों से ईसी राजि की िसूली कर सकता ह;ै 



4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART III—SEC. 4] 

(ii) कोइ भी ऄन्य पक्षकार चूककता व पक्षकार के भाग को जमा नहीं करता ह ै तो ईपभोक्ता अयोग 

मध्यस्ट्थता कायविाही को पयविसान कर सकता ह।ै 

9. प्रजिक्षण-  मध्यस्ट्थों को मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ द्वारा नामजनर्ददष्ट जििेषज्ञों द्वारा मध्यस्ट्थता के संचालन के जलए समुजचत 

प्रजिक्षण ददया जाएगा और आस तरह के प्रजिक्षण में भाग लेना ईनके जलए बाध्यकारी होगा। 

10. अचार सजंहता – पैनलबद्ध मध्यस्ट्थ मध्यस्ट्थता के दौरान दकसी पक्षकार ऄथिा ईनके दकसी काईंसेल की ईपजस्ट्थजत के 

जसिाय, मध्यस्ट्थता कायविाही की जिचाराधीन ऄिजध के दौरान दकसी भी पक्षकार या ईनके सहभागी, सहयोगी, 

संबद्धों, प्रितवकों, मूल कंपनी, सहायक कंपनी, जनदेिकों, भागीदारों या कमवचाररयों अदद के साथ या ईनके दकसी 

काईंसेल के साथ प्रत्यक्ष या ऄप्रत्यक्ष रुप से संपकव  नहीं कर सकते। 

(2) पैनलबद्ध मध्यस्ट्थ दकसी भी पक्षकार या ईसके सहभाजगयों, संबद्धों, प्रितवकों, मूल कंपजनयों, सहायक 

कंपजनयों, जनदेिकों, भागीदारों या कमवचाररयों ऄथिा ईनके दकसी काईंसेल से कोइ भी ईपहार या सत्कार 

नहीं ल ेसकेगा। 

(3) धारा 77 के खण्ड (क) और खंड (ख) के तहत ऄपेजक्षत प्रकटन के ऄलािा, प्रत्येक मध्यस्ट्थ ईसे सौंपे गए मामल े

म ें मध्यस्ट्थता अरमभ करन ेसे पहले जनम्नजलजखत जानकारी का प्रकटीकरण करेगा, ऄथावत् : 

(i) क्या िह ितवमान म ें या जिगत में ईपभोक्ता जििाद या ऄन्य कायविाही के दकसी भी पक्षकार या ईसके 

सहभागी, संबद्धों, मूल कंपनी, ऄधीनस्ट्थ कंपनी, जनदेिक, भागीदारों या कमवचाररयों से या दकसी भी 

व्यजक्त से दकसी भी प्रकार से दकसी भी जनजी; कारबार या िृजत संबन्धों म ें जुडा हुअ ह;ै 

(ii) क्या ऐसी कोइ पररजस्ट्थजत म ें जिद्यमान ह ै जजसम ें ईसकी स्ट्िततं्रता या जनष्पक्षता पर युजक्तयकु्त संदेह 

ईत्पन्न हो सकता ह।ै 

11. मध्यस्ट्थता कायिव ाही- (1) मध्यस्ट्थता पक्षकारों ऄथिा ईनके प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजधयों या काईंसेलों की ईपजस्ट्थजत में की 

जाएगी। 

(2) मध्यस्ट्थता मध्यस्ट्थ के समक्ष प्रथम ईपजस्ट्थजत की तारीख से तीन माह की ऄिजध परूी होन े पर समाप्त हो 

जाएगी जब तक दक ईपभोक्ता अयोग द्वारा मध्यस्ट्थता समापन की ऄिजध को बढाया न गया हो, जजस 

मामलों म ें यह ईस बढाए गए समय के परूा हो जान ेपर समाप्त कर दी जाएगी। 

(3) पक्षकार व्यजक्तगत रूप से या ईनके संबंजधत काईंसेल, या प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजधयों के माध्यम से मध्यस्ट्थ के 

समक्ष ईपसंज्ञात होन ेके पात्र होंगे। 

(4) मध्यस्ट्थ नैसर्थगक न्याय और जनष्पक्ष भूजमका के जसद्धांतों के ऄनुसार काय व करेगा ककत ुजसजिल प्रदक्रया संजहता, 

1908 (1908 का 5) या भारतीय साक्ष्य ऄजधजनयम, 1872 (1872 का 1) के ईपबंधों द्वारा बाध्य नहीं 

होगा। 

(5) यदद पक्षकार मध्यस्ट्थता कायविाही के दौरान भाग नहीं लतेा ह,ै ईपभोक्ता अयोग ईस पक्षकार को कायविाही 

म ें भाग लेन ेका जनदेि दे सकेगा । 

(6) पक्षकार मध्यस्ट्थ को मध्यस्ट्थता कायविाही के संचालन के जलए युजक्तयकु्त अिश्यकतानसुार ऐसी सभी 

जानकारी प्रदान करेगा। 

(7) प्रत्येक सुनिाइ की तारीख पर मध्यस्ट्थ द्वारा कायविाही का ऄजभलेख तैयार दकया जाएगा और पक्षकारों या 

ईनके काईंसेलों, प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजधयों या ऄटर्थनयों द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत दकया जाएगा। 

(8) पक्षकारों के बीच जनष्पाददत करार को मध्यस्ट्थ द्वारा ईपभोक्ता अयोग को एक सीलबंद जलफाफे में ऄर्ग्षेण 

पत्र के साथ प्रस्ट्ततु दकया जाएगा। 



[भाग III—खण् ड 4] भारत का राजपत्र : ऄसाधारण 5 

(9) यदद आन जिजनयमों म ें जिजहत समय के भीतर पक्षकारों के बीच कोइ करार नहीं दकया जाता ह ैतो मध्यस्ट्थ 

ईपभोक्ता अयोग को मध्यस्ट्थता के दौरान क्या ईजागर हुअ, पक्षकारों द्वारा क्या जनणवय जलया गया ऄथिा 

समझौता क्यों नहीं हो सका के बारे में कोइ भी प्रकटीकरण दकए जबना सूजचत करेगा।  

12. मध्यस्ट्थ की भजूमका – (1) मध्यस्ट्थ पक्षकारों के बीच जििाद के स्ट्िैजछछक संकल्प की सुजिधा का प्रयास करेगा, यदद 

कोइ गलतफहमी हो तो ईसे दरू करन ेम ें सहायता करेगा, और ईनके जििादों को जनपटाने के जलए कदम ईठाएगा ककत ु

पक्षकारों पर कोइ ितव या व्यिस्ट्थापन लाग ूनहीं करेगा। 

(2) मध्यस्ट्थ पक्षकारों के समक्ष व्यिस्ट्थापन की ितों पर ईनके हस्ट्ताक्षर प्राप्त करने से पहल ेईनककी व्याख्या 

करेगा। 

13. गोपनीयता – (1) पक्षकारों और मध्यस्ट्थ मध्यस्ट्थता की कायिव ाही के दौरान ज्ञात होन ेिाली घटनाओं के संबन्ध म ें

गोपनीयता बनाए रखगें े और मध्यस्ट्थ कायविाही के दौरान प्रस्ट्ताि और ऄजभव्यक्त जिचारों से ईत्पन्न दकसी भी सूचना, 

दस्ट्तािेज आत्यादद पर जनभवर नहीं होगा। 

(2) मध्यस्ट्थता कायविाही की कोइ श्रव्य या दशृ्य ररकॉर्डडग नहीं की जाएगी। 

14. सचंार – मध्यस्ट्थ सभी पक्षकारों को प्रजतयों सजहत ऄपनी ररपोट व के जसिाय, ईपभोक्ता अयोग से संपकव  नहीं करेगा। 

15. प्रजतरक्षण – (1) कोइ भी मध्यस्ट्थ, िास्ट्तजिक रूप से, मध्यस्ट्थ के रूप म ें ईसके द्वारा दकए गए ऄथिा दकए जाने से छूट 

गए दकसी काय व के जलए दकसी जसजिल ऄथिा दांजडक कायविाही के जलए ईत्तरदायी नहीं होगा। 

(2) मध्यस्ट्थता की कायविाही के दौरान प्राप्त दकसी भी सूचना या ईसके द्वारा की गइ कारविाइ के संबन्ध म ें गिाही 

देने के जलए दकसी पक्षकार द्वारा मध्यस्ट्थ को दकसी न्यायालय या ऄन्य फोरम म ें ईपसंज्ञात होन ेके जलए समन 
नहीं दकया जाएगा। 

16. ररपोट व – (1) प्रत्येक मध्यस्ट्थता प्रकोष्ठ ईससे संलग्न राज्य अयोग या राष्ट्रीय अयोग को एक जतमाही ररपोट व प्रस्ट्ततु 

करेगा, जजसम ें जनम्नजलजखत सूचना िाजमल होंगे: 

(क) प्रत्येक के ऄनुभि और ऄहतव ा सजहत पैनलबद्ध मध्यस्ट्थों की सूची; 

(ख) जतमाही के प्रारंभ म ें लंजबत मामलों की संख्या; 

(ग) जतमाही के दौरान संदर्थभत दकए गए मामलों की संख्या; 

(घ) जतमाही के दौरान जनपटाए गए मामलों की संख्या; 

(ङ) जतमाही के ऄंत म ें लंजबत मामलों की संख्या; 

(च) प्रत्येक मध्यस्ट्थ को सौंपे गए मामलों की संख्या, जतमाही के दौरान ईसके द्वारा जनपटाए गए मामलों की संख्या 

और ईन मामलों की संख्या जजनम ें ईसे संदर्थभत मध्यस्ट्थता सफल रही; 

(छ) ईन मामलों की संख्या, जो मध्यस्ट्थ सफल नहीं था; 

(ज) जतमाही के दौरान प्रत्येक मध्यस्ट्थ को संदत्त दकया गया फीस 

(2) प्रत्येक जतमाही की समाजप्त के एक माह के भीतर ररपोट व प्रस्ट्ततु की जाएगी। 

एस. हनुमंथा राि, संयुक्त पंजीयक 

 [जिज्ञापन III/4/ऄसा./138/2020-21] 

 

 



6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART III—SEC. 4] 

NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION 

NOTIFICATION 

New Delhi, the 24th July, 2020 

F. No. A-105/MR/NCDRC/2020.—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 103 of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, hereby makes the following Regulations, namely:— 

1. Short title and commencement.—(1) These regulations may be called the Consumer Protection (Mediation) 
Regulations, 2020. 

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette. 

2. Definitions.—(1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, — 

(a) ―Act‖ means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019); 

(b) ―Consumer Commission‖ means  a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established 
in a District under section 28 of the Act, a State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established in a State under section 42 of the Act or the National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission established under section 53 of the Act; 

(c) ―Mediation Cell’ means a Consumer Mediation Cell established under sub-section (1) of section 74 
and includes the Consumer Mediation Cell attached to the regional benches of the National 
Commission. 

(d) ―party‖ means a party to a consumer dispute or any other proceeding pending before a Consumer 
Commission.  

(e) ―rules‖ mean the rules made under the Act; 

(f) ―section‖ means a section of the Act; 

(g) ―settlement‖ means a settlement arrived at in the course of a mediation proceeding in respect of all 
or some of the issues involved in a consumer dispute pending before a Consumer Commission.  

(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Act or the rules shall 
have the meaning as assigned to them in the Act or in the rules, as the case may be. 

3. Eligibility for empanelment as mediator.—The following persons shall be eligible to be empanelled with a 
Mediation Cell— 

(i) retired Judges of Supreme Court of India; 

(ii) retired Judges of the High Courts; 

(iii) retired Members of a Consumer Commission; 

(iv) retired District and Session Judges, retired Additional District and Session Judges or other retired 
Members of the Higher Judicial Services of a State; 

(v) retired Judicial officers, having experience of not less    than ten years; 

(vi) an advocate with a minimum experience of ten years at Bar; 

(vii) the mediators empanelled with the Mediation Cell of the Supreme Court of India, High Court or a 
District Court; 

(viii) a person having experience of at least five years in mediation or conciliation; 

(ix) experts or other professionals with at least fifteen years’ experience or retired senior bureaucrats or 
retired executives. 

4. Disqualifications for empanelment.—(1) The following persons shall be disqualified for being empanelled 
as a Mediator, namely:- 

(i) a person who has been adjudged as insolvent; 

(ii) person against whom criminal charges involving moral turpitude are framed by a criminal court and 
are pending; 

(iii) a person who has been convicted by a criminal court for any offence involving moral turpitude; 



[भाग III—खण् ड 4] भारत का राजपत्र : ऄसाधारण 7 

(iv) a person against whom disciplinary proceedings have been initiated by the appropriate disciplinary 
authority and are pending or have resulted in a punishment. 

(2) A person who is or has been interested in or connected with the subject matter of the consumer 
dispute or is related to or has been associated or connected in any manner, including in a 
professional capacity, with any of the parties to the consumer disputes or any of their associates, 
affiliates, promoters, holding companies, subsidiaries companies, partners, directors or employees, 
shall be disqualified for being nominated as a mediator in that case. 

5. Procedure for empanelment of mediator. –(1) Each Consumer Commission shall invite applications from 
eligible persons for empanelment as mediators, by publication of a notice in at least one English and one 
vernacular newspaper widely circulated in its jurisdiction.  

(2) The applications received by the Mediation Cell for empanelment as mediator shall be scrutinized 
and the list of eligible applications shall be placed before the selection committee constituted under 
sub-section (1) of section 75. 

(3) The Selection Committee shall determine its procedure for making its recommendation and, after 
taking into account the suitability, integrity as well as relevant experience of the candidates, 
recommend a panel to be maintained by the Mediation Cell.  

(4) The panel of mediation shall consist of not more than such number of persons in the Mediation Cells 
attached to a Consumer Commission as may be decided by the President of that Consumer 
Commission. 

(5) The consent of the persons whose names are included in the panel shall be obtained before 
empanelling them. 

(6) The Mediation Cell shall be headed by the President of the Consumer Commission. 

6. Removal of mediator.—If a mediator is discovered to be disqualified or he in any manner misconducts 
himself as a mediator or he is otherwise found unsuitable to continue as a mediator, the Mediation Cell may 
remove his name from the panel of mediators after giving an opportunity of hearing to him.  

7. Re-empanelment of mediator.—Only such mediators shall be eligible for re-empanelment who, in the 
opinion of the Mediation Cell, have successfully and efficiently discharged their functions as empanelled 
mediators and such re-empanelment is made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee.  

8. Fee of mediators.—(1) A consolidated fee, in a successful mediation shall be paid to the mediator, who 
conducts the mediation proceedings, from the time of reference till their conclusion.  

(2) The fee of the mediator empanelled with a Consumer Commission, including costs of secretarial 
assistance and other ancillary expenses, shall be fixed by the President of the respective Consumer 
Commission, case wise, considering the nature of the dispute.  

(3) In an unsuccessful mediation, half of the aforesaid fee will be paid to the mediator. 

(4) The fee of the mediator shall be shared equally by the two sets of parties. 

(5) The mediator who successfully conducts part of the proceedings will be paid such fee as may be 
fixed by the President of the Consumer Commission. 

(6) The fee shall be deposited in advance, with the Mediation Cell. 

(7) If a party does not deposit his share of the fee or the cost of mediation, the Consumer Commission 
may, on the application of the mediator or any other party, direct the party in default to deposit the 
same within a week, and if– 

(i) he fails to deposit such fee or cost, the Consumer Commission may permit the other parties 
to deposit the same and recover the said amount, from the party in default, in the manner 
prescribed for the execution of a money decree by a Civil Court; 

(ii) no other party deposits the share of the party in default, the Consumer Commission may 
terminate the mediation proceedings.  

9. Training.—The mediators shall be given appropriate training in conducting mediation by such experts as 
may be nominated by the Mediation Cell and it shall be obligatory for them to attend such training. 

10. Code of conduct.—(1) The empanelled mediators shall not communicate, directly or indirectly with any of 
the parties or their associates, affiliates, promoters, holding companies, subsidiaries companies, directors, 
partners or employees or with any of their counsel during pendency of the mediation proceedings, except 
during the course of the mediation, in the presence of the parties or their counsel. 



8  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART III—SEC. 4] 

(2) The empanelled mediator shall not accept any gift or hospitality from any of the parties or their 
associates, affiliates, promoters, holding companies, subsidiaries companies, directors, partners or 
employees or any of their counsel.  

(3) In addition to the disclosure required under clauses (a) and (b) of section 77each mediator shall 
disclose the following information before commencement of the mediation in a case assigned to 
him, namely:- 

(i) whether he has or in the past had any personal, business or professional relationship or 
connection with any of the parties to the consumer dispute or other proceedings or any 
person associated or connected in any manner, to any of the parties or their associates, 
affiliates,  parent companies, subsidiaries  companies, directors, partners or employees; 

(ii) whether there exists any circumstance which may give rise to be reasonable doubt as to his 
independence and impartiality.  

11. Mediation proceedings.—(1) The mediation shall be conducted in the presence of the parties or their 
authorised representatives or counsel. 

(2) The mediation shall stand terminated on expiry of three months from the date of first appearance 
before the mediator unless the time for completion of mediation is extended by the Consumer 
Commission, in which case it shall stand terminated on expiry of such extended time.  

(3) The parties shall be entitled to appear before the mediator in person or through their respective 
counsel or authorised representatives.   

(4) The mediator shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and fair play but shall not be bound 
by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(1 of 1872). 

(5) If a party does not participate in the mediation proceedings, the Consumer Commission may direct 
such a party to participate in the proceedings. 

(6) The parties shall provide all such information to the mediator as may be reasonably required by him 
for conducting the mediation proceedings. 

(7) The record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the mediator on every date and shall be signed 
by the parties or their Counsel, authorised representatives or Attorneys. 

(8) The agreement executed between the parties shall be submitted by the mediator, to the Consumer 
Commission, in a sealed cover, with a forwarding letter. 

(9) If no agreement is executed between the parties, within the time prescribed in these regulations, the 
mediator shall intimate so, to the Consumer Commission, without in any manner disclosing as to 
what transpired during the mediation proceedings, what was the stand taken by the parties or why 
the agreement could not be reached. 

12. Role of mediator.—(1) The mediator shall attempt to facilitate a voluntary resolution of the disputes 
between the parties, assist them in removing the misunderstandings, if any, and generating options to resolve 
their disputes, but shall not impose any term or any settlement upon the parties. 

(2) The mediator shall explain the terms of the agreement, to the parties, before obtaining their 
respective signatures on it. 

13. Confidentiality.—(1) The parties and the mediator shall maintain confidentiality in respect of the events that 
transpire during the mediation proceedings and shall not use or rely upon any information, document etc. 
produced, the proposals and admissions made or the views expressed during the mediation proceedings.  

(2)  There shall be no audio or video recording of the mediation proceedings. 

14. Communications.—The mediator shall not communicate with the Consumer Commission except by way of 
his report, with copies to all the parties. 

15. Immunity.—(1)No mediator shall be liable for any civil or criminal proceedings, for any act done or omitted 
to be done bonafidely by him, in his capacity as a mediator. 

(2) The mediator shall not be summoned by a party to appear in a Court or other forum, to testify in 
regard to any information received or the action taken by him during the mediation proceedings.  



[भाग III—खण् ड 4] भारत का राजपत्र : ऄसाधारण 9 

16. Reports.—(1) Every Mediation Cell shall submit a quarterly report to the District Commission, the State 
Commission or the National Commission to which it is attached, containing the following information, 
namely:- 

(a) a list of its empanelled mediators, including experience and qualifications of each of them; 

(b) the number of cases pending before it at the beginning of the quarter; 

(c) the number of cases referred to it during the quarter; 

(d) the number of cases disposed of during the quarter; 

(e) the number of cases pending at the end of the quarter; 

(f) the number of cases assigned to each mediator, the number of cases disposed of by him 
during the quarter and the number of cases in which the mediation referred to him was 
successful; 

(g) the number of cases in which the mediation was not successful; 

(h) the fee paid to each mediator during the quarter. 

(2) The report shall be submitted within one month of the end of each quarter. 
 

 
S. HANUMANTHA RAO, Jt. Registrar                                                              

 [ ADVT.-III/4/Exty./138/2020-21] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.